{{Specs-Card
|code=a_29_hudson
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The A-29 first started out as the "Model 14 Super Electra", a successful commercial airliner. A few years later, Lockheed experimented with a reconnaissance/light bomber version of the Super Electra. As luck would have it, Britain was also looking for a combat aircraft for their own air force. Over 200 Hudsons were delivered to the Royal Air Force where they would undergo further redesigns and improvements. The A-29 was one of Lockheed's redesigns which featured two Wright R-1820-27 but was largely the same aircraft as the A-28. China received 26 A-29 Hudsons, but not much is known about the A-29 in Chinese service as many were lost in accidents. Only a handful actually were put to use in combat.

Introduced in [[Update 1.91 "Night Vision"]], the '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a light bomber that also served in various other roles. The A-29 was essentially the regular Hudson bomber but received updates to make it a more viable troop transport. It featured more economical engines as well as armament changes. The A-29 has less than stellar defensive armament: with only a single 12.7 mm machine gun turret and a single 7.62 mm machine gun turret. A player's best defensive tactic in this case is to dive away from opponents with its relatively impressive 564 km/h (350 mph) structural speed limit. It also has two offensive 7.62 mm machine guns with over 500 rounds per gun. Unfortunately, this isn't suited for attacking anything but light ground targets like anti-air or howitzer positions. Overall, the A-29 does its role as a light bomber effectively, but players should take note of its lacklustre armament.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 1,981 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 391 || 376 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 27.1 || 27.9 || 6.7 || 6.7 || rowspan="2" | 600
|-
! Upgraded
| 432 || 410 || 25.0 || 26.0 || 13.2 || 9.5
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 328 || 313 || 235 || ~10 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 260 || < 290 || < 320 || > 324
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* No armour protection
* Self-sealing fuel tanks in the wingroots

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Browning (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 7.62 mm Browning machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

The A-29 is equipped with a pair of .30 (7.62 mm) Browning machine guns at the nose as the offensive armament. Due to the low gun count, this weapon is ill-suited for head-on engagements due to lacking in firepower to quickly finish the enemy off, further exactabated by the absence of any armour on the plane. Because of this, the gun's primary usage is to strafe at soft ground targets (trucks, gun positions, etc.) or an AI-controlled plane whose flew in a more predictable pattern.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|AN-M30A1 (100 lb)|AN-M57 (250 lb)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 4 x 250 lb AN-M57 bombs + 6 x 100 lb AN-M30A1 bombs (1,600 lb total)

The bombs are arranged in the bomb bay so that the 250 lb AN-M57 bombs drop first, and when all four of those are clear, the 100 lb AN-M30A1 can drop.

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)|Browning (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine gun, dorsal turret (400 rpg)
* 1 x 7.62 mm Browning machine gun, ventral turret (500 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
Being a light bomber, the A-29's most preferred tactics is to dive into enemy base and quickly release its payload. Due to the plane's weak structural integrity, however, care must be taken to prevent overspeeding and ripping your wings in the process. While the frontal .30 cal machine guns is not so useful in a dogfight, you can still use it to strafe AI-controlled planes and soft ground targets for extra credits.

Like the British Hudson, the A-29's most notable characteristic is her surprisingly good manoeuvrability. While the plane's low speed and weak offensive firepower will keep you out from joining any dogfights, it is more than enough to get your .50 cal on your six and hit right back at any pursuing fighters.
=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Nice bombload of 4 x 250 lb + 6 x 100 lb bombs
* Has 2 x forward-facing 7.62 mm MGs, each with decent amount of ammo (500 RPG), allows to strafe soft ground units
* Big, chubby fuselage may soak up bullets
* Adequate defensive guns: a powerful .50 cal protects the upper rear, and a 7.62 mm protects the downward rear which are common directions of attack
* Generally manoeuvrable at most speed
* H-tail does not get in the way of the gunners

'''Cons:'''

* The plane is virtually unarmored, rendering the crews and critical parts exposed
* Low structural limit sppeed, highly vulnerable against fighters/interceptors with altitude advantage
* Has no turrets facing the front, making it vulnerable to frontal attacks
* Lacks turret covering the sides
* Like a typical bomber, has low climb rate and top speed

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
Lockheed A-29 Hudson was one of the first major successful products of Lockheed Corporation (now part of the well-known Lockheed Martin), many countries in the late 1930s purchased it for their own purposes, including the National Revolutionary Air Force (later ROCAF).

The earliest record of the A-29 in NRAF service was in 1943 where they received 19 A-29s in Sichuan in October. The A-29 joined multiple bombing runs against Japanese-occupied areas throughout 1943; it was one of the cornerstone bombers of the NRAF before they eventually upgraded to American [[B-25J-30 (China)|B-25s]] in late 1944, while the remaining A-29s were abandoned in Chongqing and no further records of these aircraft were left.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=a_29_hudson Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[Hudson (Family)]]

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Lockheed}}
{{China bombers}}