{{About
|about=Swedish strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
|usage=the fighter version
|link=J32B
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=saab_a32a
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Swedish strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.95 "Northern Wind"]].

The A32A "Lansen" was designed and developed by the Swedish company SAAB. The development began in 1948 and it first flew in 1952. Deliveries to the Swedish air force, Flygvapnet, began in 1954. In Flygvapnet it was used as a ground-attack aircraft, being able to carry a large array of different bombs and unguided rockets as well as four 20 mm Akan m/49 canons. It remained in service until 1978 but never saw use in combat. Powered by a license-built Rolls Royce Avon engine, locally designated the RM5, it was able to break the speed of sound in a dive, thus becoming the first Swedish aircraft to fly faster than the speed of sound.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 0 m - sea level)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 1,088 || 1,084 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 34.6 || 35.6 || 44.7 || 41.8 || rowspan="2" | 900
|-
! Upgraded
| 1,101 || 1,094 || 33.6 || 34.0 || 66.2 || 55.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 524 || 491 || 320 || ~11 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 850 || < 600 || < 600 || N/A
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="5" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="2" | {{Annotation|Basic mass|Mass of the aircraft with pilot and engine oil, but no fuel or weapons load}} || colspan="3" | Wing loading (full fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | Svenska Flygmotor RM5A || 1
| colspan="2" | 8,322 kg || colspan="3" | 297 kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="4" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load) || rowspan="2" | Max Takeoff<br>Weight
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! 14m fuel || 20m fuel || 30m fuel || 46m fuel
|-
| 1,350 kg || colspan="2" | Afterburning axial-flow turbojet
| 9,163 kg || 9,523 kg || 10,123 kg || 11,084 kg || 13,500 kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB / SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="5" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (WEP)
|-
! Condition || 100% || WEP
! 14m fuel || 20m fuel || 30m fuel || 46m fuel || MTOW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || 3,424 kgf || 4,633 kgf
| 0.51 || 0.49 || 0.46 || 0.42 || 0.34
|-
| ''Optimal'' || 3,424 kgf<br>(0 km/h) || 4,899 kgf<br>(1,000 km/h)
| 0.53 || 0.51 || 0.48 || 0.44 || 0.36
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 10 mm Steel -  behind the pilot and radioman seats.
* 50 mm Bulletproof glass - Windscreen.
* 15 mm Steel - In front of forward pilot.
* 5 mm Steel - Below forward pilot.
* 5 mm Steel - Just in the upper front of the instrument panel.
* Self-sealing fuel tanks - 8 in each wing, 4 in the fuselage.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | [[Ballistic Computer]]
|-
! CCIP (Guns) !! CCIP (Rockets) !! CCIP (Bombs) !! CCRP (Bombs)
|-
| {{Tick}} || {{Tick}} || {{Tick}} || {{Cross}}
|-
|}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Akan m/49 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 4 x 20 mm Akan m/49 cannons, nose-mounted (180 rpg = 720 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|sb m/61 (120 kg)|mb m/50 (250 kg)|mb m/56 (500 kg)|mb m/50 (600 kg)}}
{{main|psrak m/49A|srak m/51|hprak m/49}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 12 x 120 kg sb m/61 bombs (1,440 kg total)
* 5 x 250 kg mb m/50 bombs (1,250 kg total)
* 3 x 500 kg mb m/56 bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 3 x 600 kg mb m/50 bombs (1,800 kg total)
* 24 x psrak m/49A rockets
* 24 x srak m/51 rockets
* 12 x hprak m/49 rockets
* 32 x chaff
* 32 x chaff + 10 x 120 kg sb m/61 bombs (1,200 kg total)
* 32 x chaff + 3 x 250 kg mb m/50 bombs (750 kg total)
* 32 x chaff + 3 x 500 kg mb m/56 bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 32 x chaff + 3 x 600 kg mb m/50 bombs (1,800 kg total)
* 32 x chaff + 20 x psrak m/49A rockets
* 32 x chaff + 20 x srak m/51 rockets
* 32 x chaff + 10 x hprak m/49 rockets

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
In Air Realistic Battles, the A32A can make very effective use of its available bombs. The 3 x [[Mb m/50 (600 kg)|600 kg m/50 bombs]] deliver 480 kg of explosive mass each, which is more than enough to destroy a base at its tier. Though having mediocre acceleration, the aircraft has sufficient speed to outrun any enemy attackers in the initial phase of the match, and can generally drop its bombs on at least one base, if sufficient at avoiding [[Su-7B|Su-7]]s and/or [[Harrier (Family)|Harrier]]s. From there onwards, it's recommended to either return to the airfield, or pick off targets using the tactic described below.

An alternative route is the traditional fighter route. The A32A has an attacker spawn, and as a result may pursue enemy attackers, including but not limited to [[AV-8A|AV-8 Harriers]], [[Yak-38]]s, [[Vautour IIA IDF/AF (France)|Vautour]] bombers, and the easiest target, the [[A-4E Early|A-4E]]. The aircraft has mediocre manoeuvrability compared to its tier, but has quite decent energy retention, and can be effective if used as a boom and zoom aircraft, maintaining speed as much as possible. Unlike the fighter variant, the [[J32B|J32]], the A32 does not have missiles. This makes it entirely reliant on 4 x 20 mm cannons, which are sufficient in taking down anything that they hit. Be warned, the cannons have a finnicky placement on the bottom of the aircraft, and take some getting used to. The elevator will also lock up at high speeds, which can be a problem.

It is recommended to keep or bring all dogfights at lower altitudes. The A32A performs best relative to other aircraft closer to the deck. When spaded, the aircraft has enough manoeuvrability to allow a decent pilot to reverse pursuing hostiles and score victories.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good climb rate
* Fast top speed
* Has 4 powerful nose-mounted cannons with high rate of fire, giving good one-second burst mass
* Good roll rate
* Fowler flap design provides excellent lift at low speeds
* Has a wide range of bombs and rockets loadouts, beneficial in tank RB
* Has decent pilot protection & airframe endurance
* Radar warning receiver

'''Cons:'''

* Mediocre manoeuvrability, almost every opponent it faces can outmanoeuvre it
* Very inefficient airbrake design that requires high angle-of-attack or aggressive banking to slow down
* Large target making it easy to get hit
* Can be difficult to land as landing flaps rip above 300 km/h
* Slow acceleration
* Cannons do not have great damage output, requiring aim

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The A32A Lansen was the initial ground-attack variant of the Saab 32 'Lansen' attacker / fighter aircraft. Designed to replace the obsolete propeller-powered Saab 18, the aircraft's design was influenced by late-war German aircraft designs such as the P. 1101, P.1110, P.1111 and P.1112. The aircraft featured a conventional low-mounted swept-wing with a sleek fuselage housing a two-man crew, while the later J 32 fighter variant had a single crewmember. The A32A was introduced in 1955 with a total of 287 aircraft built for the attack role, serving until the end of the 1970s.

Following the end of the Second World War, the primary Swedish ground-attack aircraft was the obsolete Saab 18, a propeller-driven aircraft initially designed in the late 1930s. The initial design was influenced by late-war German aircraft designs such as the P. 1101, P.1110, P.1111 and P.1112, whose blueprints were given to Saab by former Messerschmitt engineers who fled to Switzerland. Among these engineers was Hermann Behrbohm, who would become a key contributor to the Saab 29, 32 and J 35 programs.

In terms of design, the A32A had a sleek fuselage with a low-mounted wing swept 35 degrees. The aircraft was powered by a Svenska Flygmotor RM5, which was a license-produced version of the Rolls-Royce Avon jet engine. This engine provided the A 32A with a thrust-to-weight ratio of ~0.3, while the later J32B fighter featured a heavily-upgraded RM6 engine producing significantly-more thrust. From the outset, the A32A was designed to house significant amounts of electronic warfare and weapons systems. The aircraft carried four 20 mm Oerlikon aircraft cannons in the nose, and could be fitted with unguided weapons including rockets and bombs up to 600 kg. The A32A could also carry two Rb 04 anti-ship missiles, one of the first cruise missiles to enter service.

In total, 287 A32A Lansens were produced for the Swedish Air Force between 1955 and 1957, replacing the Saab 18. The aircraft proved to be fairly reliable in service in terms of both aircraft and weapons systems. Additionally, the A32A was intended to carry nuclear weapons as part of Sweden's nuclear program; these plans were shelved with the end of Sweden's nuclear program. The A32A was Sweden's last dedicated ground-attack aircraft; the last airframes were phased out in the 1970s in favour of the AJ 37 Viggen.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=saab_a32a Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Images
<gallery mode="packed-hover" heights="150">
Image:A32A over the sea!.jpg|<small>A32A</small>
</gallery>

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|s6mS74VckHw|'''Nothing To OFFER! A32A! - Sweden - Review!''' - ''Jengar''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[J32B]] - Fighter variant of the aircraft.

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/480094-a-32a-lansen/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [[wikipedia:Saab_32_Lansen|[Wikipedia] Saab 32 Lansen]]

{{AirManufacturer Saab}}
{{Sweden jet aircraft}}