{{About
| about = Japanese premium fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = the regular version
| link = A7M2
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=a7m1
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} Japanese fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.53 "Firestorm"]].

The A7M1 Reppu is the prototype version of the A7M2 in the tech tree fitted with a NK9H engine. In game this fighter is the definition of a  "jack of all trades." It has excellent energy retention, amazing turn rate, and decent  speed. These traits makes the A7M1 an excellent hybrid between a turn fighter and energy fighter. It can fit almost any playstyle because of it.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,900 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 594 || 578 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 15.7 || 16.2 || 13.6 || 13.6 || rowspan="2" | 250
|-
! Upgraded
| 643 || 617 || 14.8 || 15.0 || 21.0 || 16.9
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || ✓     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 484 || 451 || 280 || ~13 || ~10
|-
|}
Something important to take note of is that the wings break off at around 800+ km/h and it compresses at 650 km/h
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 400 || < 380 || < 380 || > 317
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 2,000 m || 1,875 hp || 2,089 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 6,000 m || 1,675 hp || 1,866 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 13 mm steel plate behind seat, angled 13°
* 70 mm bulletproof glass forward of seat, angled 24°
* Self-sealing fuel tanks

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Type 99 Model 2 (20 mm)|Type 3 (13.2 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm Type 99 Model 2 cannons, wing-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)
* 2 x 13.2 mm Type 3 machine guns, wing-mounted (300 rpg = 600 total)
* The guns have relatively low velocity, but they do pack a punch.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 2 x 60 kg Navy Type 97 Number 6 bombs (120 kg total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The A7M1 ''Reppu'' is a relatively heavy plane while still performing very similar to an [[A6M (Family)|A6M ''Zero'']] with the increased performance thanks to its high output engine. This engine however won't be the best outfitted on the A7M platform and a better can be found in the tech tree as the [[A7M2]] which boasts a Ha-43 engine with 200 hp extra.

The A7M1 that takes the best of the [[A6M (Family)|A6M]] and does it better also translates it in aerial combat. With its higher output, very similar manoeuvrability and higher rip-speeds, it can engage in all playstyles; whether the situation calls for it the A7M can either turn fight, Boom-&-Zoom, energy fight and others. Yet even with its NK9H engine, it is sometimes tricky to maintaining energy fights with enemies like the [[F6F-5]], [[P-51 (Family)|P-51]], etc.

The main focus of the A7M1 is a naval fighter, solidified by its only ordnance of 2 x 60 kg that only destroy vehicles at this rank with a direct hit. However, its strong armament of 13 mm and 20 mm machineguns makes it a hard-hitting fighter on most less-protected roof armours (<20 mm).

===Tactics===

;;Low altitude fighting

This is where the {{PAGENAME}} shines and players familiar with the [[A6M (Family)|A6M]] will feel right at home and. Newer players will become familiar with its playstyle and get the hang of it quite easily due its better performance and more forgiving yet punchier gun-choice with plenty of ammo to spare compared to other fighters.

Only a couple of planes like Spitfires can be a challenging opponent at low altitudes, mainly because most planes will lose energy when fighting with the A7M1 at low altitudes when the A7M1 is able to outturn and be on their tail in couple seconds. The 13 mm and 20 mm armaments combined are very deadly and will tear down any plane in a well placed burst. Aim for center of mass when turn fighting, and tail when tailing, aim especially for the elevators.

;;High altitude fighting

Turn fighting at high altitude is rather difficult since, the higher you go, the less air pressure there is. This means there will be less air to lift your plane when doing a hard turn compared to sea level, meaning the A7M1 will not be able to turn as fast as you do at sea level. This should be taken into consideration since most of the planes at high altitudes (4+ km) often have superchargers or turbochargers ([[P-47 (Family)|P-47]] for example) and will make an easy prey out of you, as you do not maintain the same energy nor speed they maintain.

;;Bomber Interception

The drawbacks from high altitude does not stop the A7M1 from fighting in the clouds. One of the easiest targets for the A7M1 are bombers as they are big, have big wingspans and are often slow (With the exepction of dive bombers or strike fighters). They can be easily destroyed with the 13 mm and 20 mm armaments due to their sheer calibre and destructive ammunition. When engaging a bomber, aim for the engines or wings. With the right belts equipped, a few well placed hits on the engines can put them on fire and firing on the wings may damage their ability to turn or even destroy the wing completely.

Be careful when engaging bigger preys as they might turn into a predator if handled wrongly. Hit fast and hard, put bullets into the cockpit or make short work of their wings. Do not tail it, most bombers will shred the A7M badly and a fire is most guaranteed, which the A7M won't last long through.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* '''A'''7M for Carrier-based fighter:
** Arrestor hook
** Decent cannon armament
** Extremely manoeuvrable
*** Excellent turn rate
*** Rather poor roll rate
** Very short takeoff distance
* Common Navy plane construction:
** Decent offensive armament: [[Type 99 Model 2 (20 mm)|20 mm Type 99 Model 2 Cannon]]
*** ''Ground Targets'': Great for Ground battles
<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
:::* AP-I:
::::* Shreds soft targets, and can weaken / destroy weak top armoured tanks, especially engine decks
::::* Easily sets fire to air targets
:::* HEF(T):
::::* Tracer can help you aim on target
::::* The few rounds in the belt can still wreck havoc on enemy planes with their HE filler 
</div>

::* ''Stealth'': Great for Air battles
<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
:::* No tracers
:::* HEF:
::::* Near full HE belt
::::* Wrecks havoc on enemy planes with HE filler 
:::* AP-I:
::::* Easily sets fire to air targets
</div>

:* Excellent manoeuvrability
:* Small radiator drag

* '''A7M''' specific:
** 70 mm bulletproof glass in front of the pilot
** Large ammunition pool
** Fields 13.2 mm machine guns unlike most other Japanese fighters using 7.7 mm

'''Cons:'''

* '''A'''7M for Carrier-based fighter:
** Low dive speed, and easily compressed in a dive

* '''A7M''' specific:
** Significantly increased size compared to [[A6M (Family)|A6M]]
*** Flimsy and large wings, easily damageable
*** Roll rate extremely slow, slow turn prep

* '''{{PAGENAME}}''' specific:
** Engine tends to overheat rather quickly.

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
{{main|A7M_(Family)#History|l1=History of the A7M}}

In late 1940, right after the [[A6M (Family)|A6M]] started entering its production phase, the navy requested Mitsubishi develop a direct successor of the A6M by 1941, but due engine choice for a high-output compact engine was scarce, and the development team having their hands filled with development of the [[A6M2|A6M2 Mod.21]] and developing the [[J2M (Family)|J2M]] made Mitsubishi decide to scrap the request.

By 1942 as development of the [[A6M3|A6M3 Mod.32]] and [[J2M2|J2M2 Mod.11]] were finished, the navy once more ordered Mitsubishi and their team to design a direct successor to the A6M that would be faster and as nimble as the Zero, but as before, engines which would suit the plane were still in development and the team had to design a plane while still having to wait on a viable engine.

As development of the A7M platform came to an end, the last set piece and main problem of the A7M development, being the engine, led to the first prototype to make use of the Nakajima NK9 "Homare". This singular plane would be the first A7M and respectively would become the [[A7M1 (NK9H)|A7M1]] and a trial flight would be conducted on the 6th of May, 1944.

While the wingload was acceptable of 150 kg/m², manoeuvrability and handling were excellent but the engine was simply underpowered and couldn't meet the speed requirements the Navy were looking for and ended up disappointed and cancelled of the project.

But as Mitsubishi already got a greenlight to use Mitsubishi's home-made engine with the MK9 beforehand, the project sparked interest once more for the Navy with the [[A7M2#History|A7M2]].

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=a7m1 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[A7M2]]

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/272050-mitsubishi-a7m1/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Mitsubishi}}
{{Japan fighters}}
{{Japan premium aircraft}}