{{About
| about = American bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = the Swedish bombers
| link = B18 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=b_18a
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.59 "Flaming Arrows"]].

This is the first multi-engine land-based bomber available in the American Bomber tech tree. With a maximum bomb load of 2,000 lbs, it is a decent medium bomber, although its gunners' fields of fire are somewhat poor, the only viable one being the dorsal turret gunner which suffers from the large blind spot the rudder creates directly behind the aircraft. It is recommended to level bomb at high altitude, as its poor manoeuvrability means you will have a hard time bombing moving ground targets at low altitude without a relatively straight bombing run.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 3,049 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 357 || 344 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 21.9 || 22.8 || 5.7 || 5.7 || rowspan="2" | 500
|-
! Upgraded
| 395 || 375 || 20.1 || 21.0 || 10.3 || 7.7
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 333 || 324 || 280 || ~10 || ~4
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 200 || < 270 || < 250 || > 324
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 1,158 m || 860 hp || 1,032 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 2,926 m || 850 hp || 1,020 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- No armour protection
- Engines and fuel tanks in root of wing

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}

<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|AN-M30A1 (100 lb)|AN-M57 (250 lb)|AN-M64A1 (500 lb)|AN-M65A1 (1,000 lb)|AN-M66A2 (2,000 lb)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

- 12 x 100 lb AN-M30A1 bombs (1,200 lb total)
- 8 x 250 lb AN-M57 bombs (2,000 lb total)
- 4 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bombs (2,000 lb total)
- 2 x 1,000 lb AN-M65A1 bombs (2,000 lb total)
- 1 x 2,000 lb AN-M66A2 bomb (2,000 lb total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}

<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|Browning (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

- 1 x 7.62 mm Browning machine gun, chin turret (500 rpg)
- 1 x 7.62 mm Browning machine gun, dorsal turret (500 rpg)
- 1 x 7.62 mm Browning machine gun, ventral turret (500 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

As the first non-naval bomber available to the Americans, this plane is faster than its predecessors in the tech tree, the PBY flying boats. Its bomb load isn't bad for rank 1, with its maximum bomb load being either a single 2,000 lbs bomb (which is enough to destroy a base in one strike in RB as of update 1.95) or eight 250 lbs bombs, which is more than enough to take out a base with two bombs left to spare at matches in the 1.0-2.0 range. The defensive armament is somewhat lackluster however, with only 3 defensive positions, and of the 3 only one is somewhat viable for the defence of the aircraft. The lower ventral gunner is almost useless, and easily taken out, and the frontal gunner is only useful if your current enemy is directly in front and below you. The last turret, a massive dorsal contraption, can fire anywhere in around the aircraft. However, it cannot fire at things directly above it or below it, limiting its effectiveness. In addition, a significant bind spot is formed by to the rather large tail fin and rudder. Overall this bomber can be considered a trainer for the later American heavy bombers with its slow lumbering presence, high bomb load and multiple defensive positions.

Low manoeuvrability of this giant bomber does not allow dive bombing and the large wing area is easy prey to enemy fighters as the wings can be ripped off with the slightest damage. Most often, you will want to maintain altitude at your operational ceiling and bomb the enemy bases, or you can spray along enemy AAA emplacements.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Fairly manoeuvrable for a bomber
- Great turn time, even stock (22.8 seconds stock and 21 seconds upgraded)
- One of the first aircraft to have a co-pilot
- Single 2,000 lb bomb can destroy an entire base, decimate vehicle formations, and be of great use in battles
- Frontal gunner has a bigger field of fire allowing some flexibility in engaging other aircraft
- Fairly fast for its tier and class, meaning you can outrun most biplanes, Soviet I-153s being an exception
- Similar playstyle to the B-10, pilots can expect similar general performance
- Matchmaking tends to place the {{PAGENAME}} against fairly weak enemy fighters

'''Cons:'''

- Rather slow
- Weak defensive armament will not help against enemy fighters especially firing from blind spots
- Nose machine gun can't fire directly to the front
- Very large plane and can be an easy target to shoot down without a fighter escort
- Defensive armament (.30 cal MGs) cannot compete with its Soviet or German counterparts or other nations that have a fire rate advantage
- The engines are fairly easy to target and knock out with centreline weaponry like those found on Yak-1s and LaGG-3s
- It has gained notoriety for its bombload, meaning you are a team-wide target
- When doing a loop, it commonly overshoots the cursor, leading to a loss (or gain) of speed\
- No armour

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

In the mid-1930s, the Douglas Aircraft Company developed the medium bomber B-18 Bolo with the intent to replace the Martin B-10 bomber. Though it was a heavier aircraft than the B-10 and based upon the successful DC-2 aircraft body, the B-18 utilized more crew members allowing for a dedicated bombardier, turret gunners, pilot and co-pilot. By 1940 however, the aircraft was considered to be underpowered and had inadequate defensive armaments (too many blind-spots the nose and dorsal gunner cannot get to). The bomber had an impressive 2,000 lb maximum bomb load; however, this also was already considered to be ineffectual.

Army Air units began fielding the While the Martin B-10 which was the first mass-produced bomber which exceeded pursuit fighter capabilities in the amount of ammunition it could drop. With the military always on the look-out for the next greatest technology, a request to aircraft designers was submitted to produce the next generation bomber to supersede the B-10. Three competitors submitted bids, and each presented an aircraft for the military to evaluate. Martin produced the Model 146 9 (an upgraded version of the B-10), Douglas introduced the DB-1 (the future B-18), and Boeing submitted their Model 299 which later developed into the renowned B-17. While Boeings Model 299 was clearly the superior aircraft, however, a crash during a demonstration flight due to pilot error, removed this aircraft from consideration. Cost also played into some account as, during this time of economic depression, the $99,000 Model 299 was more expensive than the $58,000 DB-1. The military offered Douglas the contract, and they proceeded to develop the bomber for production.

Douglas began fielding B-18s to evaluation units first and then later B-18A's were added to the inventory and became the backbone of the USAAC's bomber squadrons. Unfortunately, not long after the bombers arrived at their units, glaring deficiencies stood out, namely with cruise speed of the aircraft, its defensive armament and positions, defensive armour and its overall payload size. Disappointingly, the aircraft was determined to be obsolete and did not measure up to the military's requirements for a long-range bombing aircraft. These bombers would have been relative "sitting ducks" for enemy fighter aircraft.

Though determined to be a failure, the bomber still played a limited role in World War II. Early on B-18 and B-18A bombers deployed to many locations overseas, however, this proved fatal for many of this aircraft type, especially at Pearl Harbour where most of the aircraft deployed there were destroyed while still on the ground during the Japanese attack. Pulled as the frontline bomber in 1942 (replaced by the B-17), the B-18A retrofitted and modified to play a role in anti-submarine warfare. Search radars or magnetic anomaly detection equipment were added along with depth charges to allow these bombers to be converted to anti-submarine patrol aircraft. One B-18A in October 1942 successfully sank the German submarine U-512 just north of French Guiana.

It wasn't long before the B-18s were removed from U.S. military service and sold to other countries such as Brazil and Canada. Though they served in limited capabilities during the war-time effort, they continued to serve out many years in the civilian sector as trainer aircraft, transport aircraft, crop dusters and even fire retardant bombers.

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=b_18a Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Images
<gallery mode="packed-hover"  heights="150">
File:B-18A Custom 1.jpg|<small>B-18A with Bolo 37-0469 skin from the 38th Reconnaissance Squadron.</small>
</gallery>

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

- Martin [[B-10B]]
- Dornier [[Do 17 Z-2]]
- Arkhangelsky [[Ar-2]]
- [[Beaufort Mk VIII]]
- Mitsubishi [[Ki-21-Ia]]
- Fiat [[BR.20 DR]]
- SAAB [[B3C]]

== External links ==

<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

- [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/315757-douglas-b-18a/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Douglas}}
{{USA bombers}}
