{{About
| about = premium bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = B-25 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=b_25j_30_vvs_ussr
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.35]].

The B-25J-30 is a lend-lease vehicle for the Soviets and is essentially identical in-game to the USAAF [[B-25J-20]]. The minor differences are the reinforced steel pilot seats and extra armour for the dorsal gunner.

The design of the B-25 was the result of years of work and failed bids to win contracts with the United States Army Air Corps (USAAC). Initially designed to meet requirements for a payload of 1,200 lb (540 kg), a range of 1,200 mi (1,900 km) and flying at speeds faster than 200 mph (320 km/h), prototypes were built, tested and refined. Although the original XB-21 and NA-40 never materialized into a production aircraft, requirements from the USAAC came out in March of 1939 for a medium bomber carrying a payload of 2,400 lb (1,100 kg) over 1,200 mi (1,900 km) at speeds around 300 mph (480 km/h), North American modified their design of NA-40 and developed the NA-62 which went into prototype testing as the YB-25 and then ordered into production as the B-25.

The B-25 turned out to be the archetype of the medium bomber, carrying upwards of 3,000 lb (1,361 kg) of bombs and could fly at speeds up to 340 mph (547 km/h). This twin-engine bomber was fast, it could carry a large payload for its size and had several defensive turrets and gunner stations at which it could defend itself from almost any angle. To increase its versatility, several models had forward-facing fixed machine guns fitted into the nose and the cheeks of the aircraft. Later models opted to removed the glazed nose and bombardier/nose-gunner station and outfit more machine guns and even a 75 mm autocannon for strafing ground targets and especially ships. This medium bomber at times acted more like a heavy attacker opting for low-level flights which would skim treetops and the ocean to sneak up on unwary targets. It was not uncommon for B-25s to fly just above the mast/smokestack height of enemy ships when attacking.

As later models moved from the dedicated bomber position and morphed into more of an attacker role, bomb payloads were reduced to allow for more armour around the cockpit and more offensive weapons and ammunition to fill the attacker mode it took on, especially under the command of U.S. Marine Corps squadrons. With more than 10,000 B-25 aircraft variants built, they saw action in all theatres of war and were even subject to part of the lend-lease program which China and the USSR benefitted from. So versatile was this aircraft that a flight of them were specifically outfitted and their crews trained to take off from an aircraft carrier and bomb mainland Japan in a daring raid. Impressive for an aircraft not meant to take off from an aircraft carrier.

The B-25 is a fantastic bomber, attacker or both and will suit many different pilots and their different approaches to the battlefields found in War Thunder. The tail gunner has been known to set many fighters alight with their dual .50 calibre machine guns and help to prolong the life of this bomber to allow the pilot to make it to their target whether it is to bomb it or strafe it.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 3,049 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 423 || 410 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 32.3 || 33.6 || 5.4 || 5.4 || rowspan="2" | 750
|-
! Upgraded
| 468 || 444 || 29.8 || 31.0 || 10.5 || 7.7
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 591 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 382 || 320 || 293 || ~5 || ~2
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 270 || < 320 || < 350 || > 320
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 10 mm steel - front, sides & rear of the cockpit
* 10 mm steel - the rim of pilot seats
* 8 mm steel - below nose gunner
* 8 mm steel - pilot seats
* 9.5 mm - bulkhead after of dorsal turret
* 6.35 mm steel - aft of waist gunners
* 9.5 mm steel - tail turret
* 38 mm Bulletproof glass - tail turret

Rugged, sturdy, though, the B-25 is all of those things. Featuring crew armour protection that outclasses the [[B-17G-60-VE|B-17 ''Flying Fortress'']] in a handier, smaller design, the B-25J is a tough nut to crack and even harder to devoid of the crew. Calibres above 20 mm are a must for a quick kill, otherwise, the B-25 will repay in kind. Gunner positions throughout the bomber effectively cover the front, sides, top and rear of the aircraft with just the underbelly left relatively unprotected to fighters rising in a power climb. The rear gunner with his dual .50 calibre machine guns is especially devastating when they are trained on a tailing enemy fighter.

The two Wright R-2600 air-cooled radial engines are themself hard to destroy and with dropped payload, the B-25J can keep flying on just a single damaged engine, denying under armed fighters the ability to lethally cripple it. Yet this aircraft does have an Achilles heel, its fuel tanks. While present in all planes, the armour, crew and bomb bay take up all the necessary space within the fuselage, while leaving only space in the wings to house the fuel tanks. A common downfall of this aircraft is the structural failure of the wing spar due to wing fires of the fuel tanks.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 12.7 mm Browning M2 machine guns, nose-mounted (400 rpg = 800 total)
* 4 x 12.7 mm Browning M2 machine guns, cheek-mounted (400 rpg = 1,600 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|FAB-50sv (50 kg)|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|FAB-500sv (500 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 12 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (600 kg total)
* 8 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (800 kg total)
* 4 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs + 8 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (800 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs + 8 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (900 kg total)
* 4 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 1 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bomb + 10 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 3 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (1,500 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine gun, nose turret (300 rpg)
* 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, dorsal turret (400 rpg = 800 total)
* 1 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine gun, 2 x beam turrets (250 rpg)
* 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, tail turret (600 rpg = 1,200 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

'''Realistic''':

In RB battles, the most efficient yet dangerous way of earning RP with the B-25 is to first dive-bomb a base at low altitude, then strafe soft ground targets or fend off incoming fighters.

For such playstyle, it is best to choose the 3 x 500 kg bombs loadout to destroy a base in one go. Universal belt is great for the offensive and defensive guns, and their convergence is up to you. At the start of the match, choose the nearest base from you and '''tag it on the map''', this way other bombers are not likely to fight for that base. Now, with WEP, directly dive at the front edge of the base. The B-25 has a reasonably good dive acceleration and can soon dive at more than 500 km/h. However, keep watching the air speed as the B-25 will experience severe lock-up at more than 500 km/h and will rip at 570 km/h. The fastest way to get to the base is to maintain air speed around 550 km/h. While on your way, you can have a look at what ground targets are near that base. Make sure your altitude is well below 500 m when approaching the base. Flying this low can prevent the opponents from attacking from below, which minimises the lack of belly gunners of the B-25. Also, most fighters tend to chase after low-flying bombers, so if you successfully lured some enemies into chasing you, you have already done a great job for the friendly fighters, as they now have altitude advantage over the ones at your tail.

Once the base is near, level out and aim at it with the bombsight. Drop all 3 bombs at the center of the base, and immediately turn towards the nearest ground targets. Your priority should be soft targets like trucks, AA vehicles and artilleries, since they will be destroyed with a short burst of your 6x .50 cals. If you are lucky and found a long convoy of trucks, you will get plenty of RP out of it.

While strafing, you must constantly look around, above and on the minimap for any potential threats. If an enemy fighter dives on you, drop your altitude to tree-top level at once, this way the fighter is forced to face your tail guns and turrets. Use the gunner view to fire at it, but remember, leading the target correctly requires lots of practice. For the enemy fighter, there will always be 2-5 .50 cals spraying bullets at it, which is quite deadly for Japanese fighters like the A6M2/M3. Sometimes it only requires a single bullet to set those fragile fighters on fire, or to damage their large radial engines or coolers. However, the B-25 is equally likely to be set aflame or lose its tail very quickly. Once on fire there is nothing you can do except keep spraying bullets until you are destroyed.

'''Enemies worth noting:'''

* [[Fw 190 A-5]]: The Fw 190 is armed with 4 x 20 mm cannons and 2 x 7.92 mm MGs, which are very destructive and have plenty of ammo, allowing them to easily critically damage the B-25 in a burst. The plane itself is fairly well armoured, especially the thick, sloped windscreen protecting the pilot. Therefore the deadly firepower and good protection make the Fw 190 a great threat to the B-25. When a Fw 190 is tailing the B-25, concentrate your fire on its big radial engine for better chance of crippling it. If you can, try to fly towards the higher-flying teammates to lure the Fw 190 into an altitude disadvantage.

* [[A6M2]] / [[A6M3|M3]]: These fighters are well known for their manoeuvrability and climb rate. However when they are at your 6, their manoeuvrability is no longer an advantage as they have to constantly chase after you, making themselves a great target. The Zeros are poorly protected with a high chance of being set on fire, and their 20 mm cannons lack the damage to effectively hurt the B-25. When dealing with them, again, aim at their engine or even the unprotected cockpit for a pilot snipe.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Very effective front-facing armament of 6 x 12.7 mm machine for aerial attack or ground strafing
* Durable airframe which can take a beating
* Heavy defensive armament on both left and rights sides and especially the tail gunner
* Can provide initial cover for other bombers until fighters reach their altitude
* Can be used as a tactical bomber, strategic bomber or as an attacker
* Able to land on an aircraft carrier
* Good dive speed

'''Cons:'''

* The belly of the aircraft lacks any defence
* Poor climb rate and energy retention
* Less effective as a dogfighter due to its size, however, can perform Boom & Zoom without too much manoeuvring
* Less effective as a high-altitude bomber (accuracy), better for mid to low altitude bombing
* The elevator is easily shot off, the plane can still be controlled using flaps and adjusting engine power

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
North American B-25J-30 Mitchell twin-engine medium bomber/ground-attack aircraft

New armored pilot seats appeared in the B-25J-25 series. Also, the wing leading edge was reinforced. Beginning with machine No. 44-30111, additional armor was fitted to the upper fuselage to prevent the turret-mounted machine guns from inadvertently hitting the bomber.

From aircraft No. 44-30309 on, the Americans provided for the mounting of chemical spray tanks, similar to the Soviet VAPs, on external bomb racks.

The B-25J-30 had T-64 launchers for unguided HVAR missiles installed under the wing panels. The mechanical bomb hoist was replaced with an electric one. The gunsights were upgraded again, and a new high-precision Norden N-9B bombsight was mounted on the aircraft, beginning with No. 44-86793.

Provisions were made for carrying new guided glide bombs from plane No. 44-86692 on. The work to equip the aircraft with such bombs had begun back in 1943. GT-1 glide bombs were actually torpedoes with wings and tail fins. In July 1945, they were used to strike ships at the Japanese ports of Sasebo and Nagasaki. In Sasebo, they managed to damage and set fire to two vessels. The third bomb did not hit its target but dropped on the harbour works.

Although the B-25 had a good flight range, sometimes it was not sufficient, given the size of the Pacific Ocean Theatre. Fuel quantity had to be increased, so B-25s were modified on front-line airfields. Various additional tanks, removed from aircraft of other types, were mounted in the fuselage near the radio set.

A total of 4,318 B-25J aircraft were delivered. 72 more bombers were practically ready when their production was discontinued. Some of those machines were nevertheless completed later. 800 B-25Js of the total number were assembled directly as the ground-attack aircraft version. In addition, North American produced so-called conversion kits, which allowed the aircraft to be quickly converted on a front-line airfield. Thus, the real number of machines flying as the ground-attack aircraft version significantly exceeded the original eight hundred.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=b_25j_30_vvs_ussr Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[B-25 (Family)]]

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* Douglas [[A-26 (Family)|A-26 ''Invader'']]
* De Havilland [[Mosquito (Family)|Mosquito]]
* Mitsubishi [[Ki-67-I_Ko|Ki-61 ''Hiyrū'']]
* Nakajima [[Ki-49 (Family)|Ki-49 ''Donryu'']]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/86473-north-american-b-25j-30-mitchell/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* vvsairwar.com website - [https://vvsairwar.com/2016/09/13/it-was-a-beautiful-aircraft-the-soviet-b-25s/ It was a beautiful aircraft - The Soviet B-25s]
* lend-lease.net website - [https://lend-lease.net/articles-en/the-b-25-mitchell-in-the-ussr/ The B-25 Mitchell in the USSR]
* lend-lease.net website - [https://lend-lease.net/articles-en/b-25-mitchel-in-14-gvbad/ The B-25 Mitchell in 14 GVBAD]

{{AirManufacturer NAA}}
{{USSR bombers}}
{{USSR premium aircraft}}