{{Specs-Card
|code=b5n2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Japanese naval bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

The Allied reporting name for this aircraft was "Kate".

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 3,600 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 362 || 347 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 19.7 || 20.4 || 3.7 || 3.7 || rowspan="2" | 270
|-
! Upgraded
| 400 || 378 || 18.6 || 19.4 || 12.1 || 6.5
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || ✓     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 404 || 384 || 280 || ~11 || ~4
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 300 || < 300 || < 310 || > 300
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 2,500 m || 950 hp || 1,081 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* No armour
* Non-self-sealing fuel tanks (2 in each wing)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

* When upgrading this plane focus on getting the payload especially the torpedo modification. This is due to the high chance Japan has to get naval maps.
* After you've unlocked all the possible torpedoes, it is recommended that you research the flight performance modules first, as the aircraft has very little defensive and offensive capabilities.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)|Navy Type 98 Number 25 (250 kg)|Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 (250 kg)|Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP (800 kg)|Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)}}
{{main|Type 91 Model 3 (850 kg)|Type 91 Model 2 (835 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 6 x 60 kg Navy Type 97 Number 6 bombs (360 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 bombs (500 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg Navy Type 98 Number 25 bombs (500 kg total)
* 1 x 800 kg Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 bomb (800 kg total)
* 1 x 800 kg Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP bomb (800 kg total)
* 1 x 835 kg Type 91 Model 2 torpedo
* 1 x 850 kg Type 91 Model 3 torpedo

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Type 92 (7.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, dorsal turret (1,000 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The B5N2 is a Japanese torpedo-bomber that is lacking in offensive armaments and is defended by a single [[Type 92 (7.7 mm)|7.7 mm Type 92]] machine gun at the back, which makes it lacking in defence against enemy pursuers. Its greatest weapon is not the speed to outrun enemy fighters but its manoeuvrability and ability to do tight turns against most enemy aircraft till help arrives from the team.

The B5N2 might lack in offensive weaponry such as machine guns and cannons but it has a great variety of payload from 60 kg bombs to 800 kg bombs and even torpedoes in its arsenal to take out ground and naval targets with. Coming with 2 different 800 kg bombs, its important to pick the one most suitable for the mission, preferably the [[Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)|Navy Type Number 80 Model 1]] over the [[Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP (800 kg)|Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP]], with the benefit that the [[Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)|Type Number 80 Model 1]] has a better blast radius and more explosive power than the [[Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP (800 kg)|Type 99 Number 80 AP]] bomb which is good at taking out a single heavily armoured target. It also come with two different sets of 250 kg bombs that can be dropped one by one and are preferable when striking at two different targets than a singular 800 kg.

Against naval targets, it's most preferred to use the [[Type 91 Mod.2]] and [[Type 91 Mod.3]] to deal with the sailors, keep in mind to dive and get fast speed to quickly get in and out of engagement with a warship or patrolboat to minimize the risk of being shot down. But when doing a dive attack to get the speed its important to not go over the speed limit where the B5N2 can drop the torpedoes without having them explode in the water on contact which would make the attack futile.

Every enemy should be seen as a serious threat to the B5N2, as it does not have an offensive armament. The only thing the plane has when it comes to armament is 1 7.7 mm machine gun, which is not a reliable way to fend off enemies with it lacks damage and doesn't offer the best coverage, but at 1.7 it might be enough to scare off ill-armoured biplanes.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''
* '''B'''5N for Carrier-based torpedo bomber
** Bomber spawn
** 1x [[Type 91 Model 3 (850 kg)|Type 91 Aerial Torpedo]]
*** Torpedo has the highest drop speed in the game at {{Annotation|580 km/h|350 mph}} and is one of the most feared torpedoes in Naval Battles
** 6x [[Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)|Type 97 No.6 Land Bomb (60 kg)]]
*** Gets a bomb rack of 6 x 60 kg bombs which can be used to hit multiple targets
** 1x [[Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)|No.80 Land Bomb (800 kg)]]
*** Heaviest bomb Japanese Navy can offer 
* Common Navy plane construction:
** Excellent manoeuvrability

'''Cons:'''

* '''B'''5N for Carrier-based torpedo bomber
** No offensive armament
** No airbrakes
** Relatively Large target
* Common Navy plane construction:
** Poor defensive armament: [[Type 92 (7.7 mm)|7.7 mm Type 92 MG]]
** Fragile, little armour, and no self-sealing fuel tanks
** Exposed tail gunner

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The Nakajima B5N2 (Allied code name: Kate) was a plane first flown in January 1937 for the Imperial Japanese Navy. About ~1149 Nakajima B5N Torpedo bombers were made for the Japanese Navy. It would see service in World war 2 and was the Japanese Navy's primary torpedo bomber for the early part of World war 2. The Nakajima B5N Torpedo bomber was credited with the sinking of three US Carriers the USS Lexington CV-2, USS Yorktown CV-6 and USS Hornet CV-8. One of the most notable pilot of the B5N is Mitsuo Fuchida, who led the first wave of aircraft during the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.

Although a total of 5,928 B5Ns were built, none survived the war. Two B5N's are know to exist, both made from wreckage's. One can be seen at the Pearl Harbor Memorial, it is missing its tail, left wing, engine, canopy, and a few other parts.

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Before the advent of the B5N, Japan used the B2M and B4Y as torpedo biplanes. However, the significant limitations of biplanes were obvious, so in 1935, inspired by the monoplane A5M fighter, the Imperial Japanese Navy developed the 10-Shi torpedo bomber specification.

Nakajima and Mitsubishi participated in the competition. Nakajima decided to incorporate many new ideas in their B5N design. The prototype had a hydraulic wing-folding system so that the plane could be stored on an aircraft carrier, and Fowler flaps were used to improve stability while landing. In addition, the B5N had a hydraulic retractable landing gear system.

Although Mitsubishi also received an order for production of its own B5M torpedo bomber, the Nakajima model won the contest and in 1937 was accepted as a production model carrier-based torpedo bomber.

To create a production model, however, some changes had to be made in the prototype's design. The wing-folding system was changed to a manual one, and the flaps were replaced with conventional ones.

In 1939, the B5N2 was developed. It differed from its predecessor in its more powerful and reliable Sakae engine, which produced 1000 hp instead of the Hikari 3's 770.

At the beginning of World War II, the B5N torpedo series had no worthy competitors among Allied aircraft and made a great showing in the attack on Pearl Harbor, as well as in subsequent operations, where B5N forces sank four U.S. aircraft carriers within one year.

A total of 5,928 B5Ns were built.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=b5n2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|qsHfTef-Xvg|'''The Shooting Range #293''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 04:22 discusses the B5N and B6N torpedo bombers.}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/479188-b5n2/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Nakajima}}
{{Japan bombers}}