{{About
| about = German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other variants
| link = Bf 109 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=bf-109f-4_trop
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_Bf_109_F-4trop.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

A very good energy fighter for its rank, the Bf 109 F-4 can out climb most opponents due to its high power to weight ratio. However, WEP must be limited or else the engine would overheat, although manual engine control can remedy this. Despite that, it can Boom & Zoom and Rope-a-Dope well although one must watch out for severe control stiffening around 650 km/h.

Unfortunately, the F-4's 15 mm additional gondolas do not increase the damage output much at all while reducing flight performance. However, it is recommended you at least use it at least once to see how effective it is because depending on how you play it can really boost your firepower abilities. The 15 mm cannons are a trade-off for manoeuvrability, but this additional firepower can help rip the wings off anything you face . For example, if you prefer to get into a dogfight, the additional weaponry will not be noticeably effective. However, if you fight in the vertical, where level speed and agility is not necessarily the most important, the additional MG 151s can mean the difference between downing a plane or nothing at all.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,800 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 634 || 618 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 20.0 || 20.7 || 16.4 || 16.4 || rowspan="2" | 363
|-
! Upgraded
| 682 || 658 || 18.1 || 19.0 || 24.6 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 408 || 260 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 450 || < 390 || < 450 || > 715
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 4,950 m || 1,175 hp || 1,321 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8 mm Steel - Pilot's seat
* 10 mm Steel - Pilot's headrest
* 6 mm Steel - behind the fuel tank
* 60 mm Bulletproof glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

Energy fighters require acceleration, they live by it. Therefore most of "flight performance" upgrades are advised: Compressor, Engine and Engine injection. Meanwhile, the upgrades for the hub-firing 20 mm MG 151 should not be forgotten, especially the upgraded belts (Air targets).

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, nose-mounted (200 rpg)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

The two machine guns are mounted in the upper fuselage just in front of the pilot and fire through the propeller arc. Each are armed with the same amount of ammunition, which means that both guns will fire with each other until empty. The 20 mm cannon is mounted in the propeller shaft and fires through the propeller hub.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|MG 151 (15 mm)|Flam C 250 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 4 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (200 kg total)
* 1 x 250 kg SC250JA bomb (250 kg total)
* 2 x 15 mm MG 151 cannons, wing-mounted (125 rpg = 250 total)
* 1 x Flam C 250 incendiary bomb

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The tropical version is much like the [[Bf 109 F-4|standard F-4]] variant. New features are engine intake dust filter, a socket for sun-umbrellas and several other accommodations versus particulate matter. While these modifications allowed for prolonged service life in harsh environments like the Russian veld and Libya's desert, it also (marginally) costs top speed and engine performance due to increased air resistance and power diversion for the filtered aspirator, although these are hardly noticeable in combat.

The Bf 109 F-4 is not a great plane when you compare it to the other rank III planes, but it is effective nonetheless. Do not try to down a plane by coming behind it and giving them all you got, instead, try to scare your prey into a turn by peppering it with your 7.92 mm MG 17's, and then blow its wing off with the cannon. The cannon, unfortunately, fires relatively fast and runs out of ammo pretty quickly, so hitting a plane from the tail-end is hard to achieve.

Word to the wise: the F-4 is a fairly good turner for its class; if you are chased by an [[F4U (Family)|F4U]], [[P-51 (Family)|P-51]], [[P-47 (Family)|P-47D]], or [[Typhoon Mk Ib/L|Typhoon]], turn and destroy. The forward wing slats give the F-4 an exceptionally short turning radius. However, to survive a tangle with a [[Spitfire (Family)|Spitfire]] is an ordeal. The best strategy would be to scissor until the Spitfire either runs out of ammo or overshoots you, and then try to dive and outrun the Spitfire. Then, repeat. Do not try to out-climb the Spitfire (community nickname is a ''Spacefire'' for a reason), but try to outrun it in a dive. The [[Spitfire Mk Vc]] is superior to the F-4, avoid it.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Nimble aircraft
* Relatively good armament
* Relatively good climb rate, though not as good as a [[Spitfire (Family)|Spitfire]] or a maxed out [[P-39 (Family)|P-39 Airacobra]]
* Good sustained turn
* Faster than most opponents, such as the [[Spitfire Mk Vc]], [[Yak-3]], and [[La-5]], especially at altitude
* Additional armament is good for destroying medium and light tanks with armoured targets belt
* Both 20 mm MG 151/20 cannons can be loaded with the feared Minengeschoß round (Air targets belt)
* All weaponry mounted in the nose, allowing easy aiming without having to worry about convergence

'''Cons:'''

* Controls stiffen easily
* Overheats quickly
* Additional armament can reduce performance critically
* Poor cockpit visibility
* Prone to catching fire in a chase with a bomber
* Gunpods can't load stealth belts, thus giving the attacker's position away during a surprise attack
* For Sim, the numerous canopy frames and razorback greatly limit the all-round view, and huge engine torque causes severe turning when taking off

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The Messerschmitt Bf 109 was the Luftwaffe's most widely-used fighter at the beginning of World War II.

When the advanced English Spitfire Mk.V arrived, the Messerschmitt Bf 109F Friedrich was developed in response.

The new model featured a more powerful engine and much-improved aerodynamics, but as a result became even more difficult to control.

The Bf 109 F-4/trop variant was built for use in tropical regions. It was unique due to its air intake filter, hydraulic seals and protective covers. In addition, an umbrella was extendable over the cockpit to help keep the pilot from overheating when on the ground. The plane was equipped with a special emergency kit including a gun for self-defense and a supply of food and water.

Almost all of the Bf 109 F variants had tropical versions produced, but the Bf 109 F-4/trop was the most popular. Despite its name, the tropical variants were used not only in Africa but also on the southern steppe, where dust clouds were a significant threat to aircraft engines, as well as in the far north, where the filters protected the plane's engines from falling snow.

A total of approximately 2,200 Bf 109 Fs were constructed.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=bf-109f-4_trop Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* Macchi [[C. 205 serie 3]]
* Fiat [[G.55 sottoserie 0]]
* Kawasaki [[Ki-61-I tei]]
* Kawasaki [[Ki-100]]

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/316098-messerschmitt-bf-109-f-4trop/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer BFW}}
{{Germany fighters}}