{{About
| about = German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Bf 109 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=bf-109g-14
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The Bf 109 G-14 was one of the late-war variants of the 109 series. It aimed to standardize all the improvements from the other G models, such as a taller tail, a new engine, and the all-important MW-50 system, which drastically increased power by injecting a methanol-water mix into the engine. This allowed the engine to run at higher boost pressures and significantly increased the top speed compared to the G-6 variant. Although late-war Allied aircraft could outperform the G-14, it was still more than capable with an experienced pilot. Over 5,500 G-14s were built until the end of the war.

Introduced in [[Update 1.47 "Big Guns"]], the '''{{Specs|name}}''' is one of the last 109s in the German air tech tree. It features the same 20 mm MG 151 cannon mounted within the propeller hub found in many other 109 variants. However, the twin 7.92 mm machine guns were replaced with 13 mm MG 131 machine guns. Although the new machine guns have a lower ammunition pool compared to the 7.92 mm machine guns, the increase in firepower more than makes up for the difference with the correct ammunition belt. Players can also exchange the 20 mm MG 151 cannon with the 30 mm MK 108 cannon. However, this is not recommended due to the MK 108's extremely poor ballistics, making it only suitable for very close-range engagements. The G-14 also has access to both 2x MK 108 and 2x MG 151 gunpods mounted under the wing. This provides a substantial increase in firepower, but the single propeller-hub MG 151 is more than enough to take down enemy fighters. Unfortunately, the G-14 is severely lacking in ground attack ordnance, with only an incendiary bomb and a 250 kg bomb being available.
== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
Just like its predecessors, the Bf 109 G-14 should generally be utilized as an energy fighter/ Boom and Zoomer. While the G-14 is fairly more manoeuvrable than other Bf 109s, its increased agility should be used for maintaining high speed and energy than dog fighting, which even the G-14 is only passable at best. Due to its excellent energy retention and climb rate, it is exceptionally good at stall fighting, since many fighters will not be able to keep up with its climb rate, giving it the opportunity to put overconfident pilots in vulnerable situations.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,500 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 642 || 619 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 21.2 || 22.0 || 16.3 || 16.3 || rowspan="2" | 325
|-
! Upgraded
| 712 || 674 || 19.5 || 20.0 || 29.7 || 21.8
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 408 || 260 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 390 || < 390 || < 470 || > 250
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 7,800 m || 1,110 hp || 1,536 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 60 mm Bulletproof glass in front and rear of the cockpit.
* 4-8 mm Steel plates on pilot seat.
* 10 mm Steel plates around pilot's head.
* 21 mm Steel plate on the rear of the fuel tank, with 4 mm plates surrounding it on other sides.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MK 108 (30 mm)|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 131 (13 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* A choice between two presets:
** 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, nose-mounted (200 rpg) + 2 x 13 mm MG 131 machine guns, nose-mounted (300 rpg = 600 total)
** 1 x 30 mm MK 108 cannon, nose-mounted (65 rpg) + 2 x 13 mm MG 131 machine guns, nose-mounted (300 rpg = 600 total)

When it comes to selecting armament, it is largely dependent on the role the pilot intends to fulfil. Equipping bombs should generally only be considered as a last resort or when air cover is sufficient to facilitate tactical bombing. The very potent 30 mm cannon and gun pods should generally only be done if there is a significant threat from enemy bombers and heavy fighters. Keep in mind that while the 30 mm shells pack a high explosive filling, their muzzle velocity and ballistic coefficient results in a slow and fairly inaccurate shell. If chasing after enemy fighters, with a minimal profile exposed, it is not unusual to see 30 mm shells doing minimal damage to wings due to not detonating. Ideally, the 30 mm should only be fired against large frame aircraft from angles at which they expose the most of the plane's frame to ensure a detonation within the airframe. Keep also in mind that the Mk 108 only carries 65 rounds of ammo for the centre-mounted cannon, and 35 per gun pod, making trigger pulls very costly (especially considering its fire rate). As for belt selections for the Mk 108, it should generally be anything but the default belt due to the higher content of minegeschoß shells, beyond that it is personal preference since the difference is only cosmetic.

Adding the twin 20 mm MG 151 gun pods will substantially increase the G-14's fighting potential and longevity against other enemy fighters, due to carrying a total of 250 extra rounds. Additionally, the 20 mm's ballistic trajectory is very similar to the 13 mm machine guns, allowing for firing both weapons simultaneously at an enemy target. However keep in mind that the gun pods will run out of ammunition faster than the centre-mounted one, so if it happens, it is usually a good indication of when it is time to head back to reload, as not much ammo will usually remain in the centre mounted one afterwards. As for belts, it should generally be stealth or air targets, since every other belt option either sacrifices explosive content and contains more tracer rounds in exchange for better ground attack capabilities which are very poor even with the armoured targets belt.

Finally, keep in mind it is possible to carry both 13 mm, 20 mm, and 30 mm weaponry, however, due to the 30 mm's poor ballistic properties, it should be mapped to fire on a different button. Also remember that while gun pods can be swapped while on the airfield in game, the centre-mounted cannon '''can't''' and can only be changed from the hangar.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC250JA (250 kg)|MK 108 (30 mm)|MG 151 (20 mm)|Flam C 250 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 1 x 250 kg SC250JA bomb (250 kg total)
* 2 x 30 mm MK 108 cannons, wing-mounted (gunpods) (35 rpg = 70 total)
* 2 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, wing-mounted (gunpods) (135 rpg = 270 total)
* 1 x Flam C 250 incendiary bomb

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The Bf 109 G-14 is similar to the other 109s in terms of playstyle, having a few tweaked upgrades making it better than its predecessors and a similar ability like the [[Bf 109 G-10]] to change its 20 mm nose cannon for a 30 mm one makes it have a different range of possibility to use the G-14 compared to the other 109s. The [[Bf 109 (Family)|Bf 109]] are dedicated fighters but can but used in a lot of roles in battles ranging from fighter role to bomber role, even though it got limited options on the latter choice it can be proven useful at them all.

The G-14 can either use a single [[MG 151 (20 mm)]] or [[MK 108 (30 mm)]] option when heading to battle, depending on what target is in mind, also being able to increase its firepower a lot with either 2 x extra 20 mm or 30 mm gun pods. But equipping these pods is trading speed and manoeuvrability for firepower, which can be great in certain situations but its a well paid off trade when doing hit and runs on enemy targets increasing the successfullness of destroying the enemy aircraft. Even though it excelles in a fighter role there is still enemy fighters to be aware of like [[P-51H-5-NA]], [[Spitfire F Mk 22]] and [[I-225]] which can in experienced hands prove lethal to the G-14.

G-14 can also be equipped with a single 250 kg bomb it can with accuracy drop on unsuspecting ground targets with high precision, making 109s efficient at close air support in ground battles. But can also be a huge benefit in destroying AI grounds during air matches in case friendly bombers or attackers are destroyed and there is only medium or heavy targets left which the 30 mm or 20 mm can't make a dent on. This is where the [[SC250JA (250 kg)]] come in handy and with an experienced player can become a deadly dive bomber both in air and ground battles.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Outstandingly high climb rate and energy retention
* Great acceleration in a dive and in straight line
* Powerful and accurate armament of up to 3 x 20/30 mm cannons with mounted gondolas. 
* Nose mounted armament are beginner friendly to aim
* Additional 20/30 mm cannon gondolas don't impact performance that much
* In comparison to the G6, improved all around performance due to lighter weight while retaining same engine

'''Cons:'''

* Top speed is rather mediocre, comparing to something like [[Ki-84 ko]]
* Not very manoeuvrable (compresses at high speeds and relatively high wing-loading hampers low speed manoeuvrability)
* The stock single 20 mm gun is lacking vs. heavy armoured targets
* The rip speed of 790 km/h makes power dives impossible
* Relatively low ammo count
* In simulator, cockpit visibility (especially backwards) is poor; has severe drifting when taking off
* Outside of a single 250 kg bomb, the G-14 does not have anything to attack armoured ground targets beyond armoured cars

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
In 1943, the Bf 109 G-6 entered service, while its performance was less than stellar, its worth derived from the ability to be easily modified into dedicated fighter bomber, high altitude interceptor or reconnaissance. likewise, great care was taken to make sure the G6 could fit heavy armament for attacking bombers, which were beginning to appear in force over Germany, and the shortcoming of the Fw 190s at high altitude became increasingly apparent.

In 1944, the RLM, wishing to standardize fighter production, approved the Bf 109 G-14, which essentially a standardized version of the 109, with all improvements found on late production G-6s, including an enlarged vertical tail surface, a new canopy and Flettner tabs, for better control at higher speeds. to easy construction, it had a non-retracting tail wheel, and the distinctive bulges on the upper cowling, which housed the breechblocks of the machine guns.

In addition, the new G-14 was fitted with a DB605ASM engine. itself a heavily modified engine also used in the early G-6. It features water-methanol injection and an enlarged supercharger which is taken directly off a DB506, meaning the engine has better performance at high altitude, while conversely, it has less output at lower altitudes.

Serving alongside the 109 G-10 and K-4 in the later stages of the war, it proved to be a less than stellar performer, being outperformed by the newest types the Western Allies brought into service. However, it performed admirably in its role, and with a good pilot, was more than a match for the large majority of the Allied aircraft.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=bf-109g-14 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* Kawasaki [[Ki-61 (Family)|Ki-61]]
* Macchi [[C.205 (Family)|C.205]]
* Fiat [[G.55 (Family)|G.55]]

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/216830-messerschmitt-bf-109-g-14/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer BFW}}
{{Germany fighters}}