{{About
| about = premium American fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Bf 109 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=bf-109f-4_usa
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|cockpit=cockpit_bf-109f-4_usa.jpg
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} American fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 635 || 623 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 20.3 || 20.7 || 14.2 || 16.3 || rowspan="2" | 363
|-
! Upgraded
| 695 || 665 || 18.2 || 19.0 || 28.3 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 408 || 260 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 450 || < 390 || < 450 || > 715
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 4,950 m || 1,185 hp || 1,333 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- 60 mm bulletproof glass - armoured windscreen
- 6 mm steel - bulkhead behind cockpit
- 8 mm steel - pilot's seat
- 10 mm steel - pilot's headrest
- Critical components located in front of aircraft (fuel, pilot, engine, controls)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, nose-mounted (200 rpg)
- 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The Bf 109 F-4 represents the pinnacle of the Friedrich line of Messerschmitt. With a powerful engine and decent armament, the F-4 is an extremely powerful fighter in any hands. It is mainly a dogfighter, with a well-rounded mix of good climb rate, speed, manoeuvrability, and weaponry.

As the Bf 109 F-4 USA Premium comes with all upgrades, it is an extremely effective aircraft at purchase. Its main strengths lie in its astounding low-speed/mid-altitude climb rate. Use this to your advantage in a dogfight. Your opponents will be caught off guard when you rocket away at 25 m/s with your WEP. Compared to other aircraft at the same BR, the F-4 is more than able to take on most enemy aircraft.

Unfortunately, for a premium plane, the F-4 isn't quite so stellar. It is relatively under-gunned, with only one 20mm cannon and two MGs. Pilots must be precise- as the single MG-151 will jam under intensive fire, even though the mods are all equipped.

The F-4 is also only average in its energy retention capabilities. Its redeeming feature for Boom & Zoom is its climb rate. It does have a relatively good turn rate but is also hampered by its lack of good energy retention. Stay in middle altitudes and dive and engage slower fighters. Avoid tangling with extremely manoeuvrable fighters such as the Yaks.

The F-4 performs poorly at high altitude. Do not try to chase planes above 4,000-5,000 m. In a dive, the F-4's wings will tear relatively quickly. Avoid diving at speeds above 800 km/h.

One could consider the F-4 a jack-of-all-trades, master of none. It has an average-to-good turn rate, decent weaponry, astounding climb rate, and poor energy retention.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Very good rate of climb, very good dive speed
- It is a Premium aircraft, all modifications are equipped. It can perform better than some other Bf 109s on the battlefield
- MG 151 that can fire HE shells
- All weaponry mounted in the nose, allowing easy aiming without having to worry about convergence

'''Cons:'''

- No gunpods as the R6 modification is only available for Germans
- No bombs
- Poor energy retention
- Wings tear easily
- For Sim, the numerous canopy frames and razorback greatly limit the all-round view, and huge engine torque causes severe turning when taking off

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Messerschmitt Bf 109 F-4 "Friedrich" single-engine front-line fighter

On May 29, 1942, a pair of German Bf 109 F-4 fighters from the 9th Squadron of the III./JG 3 Fighter Wing, piloted by Petty Officer E. Volkmann as the leader and Corporal A. Kuhn as the wingman, lost their bearings, ran out of fuel, and made a forced landing on a plot of arable land behind the front lines in the Chuguyev area. The Red Army thus obtained two Friedrichs in quite a good condition.

The fighter, with a serial number of 7690 and a yellow tail number reading "12" on the fuselage, was photographed from different angles and prepared for flight tests at the Red Army Air Force Research Institute.

However, it soon became known that the captured Messerschmitt located in the USA had been damaged during flight, and the Allies requested that one of the two planes be transferred to them. General A. A. Novikov, Commander-in-Chief of the Red Army Air Force, gave permission to send the new Messerschmitt over the ocean.

In the USA, the Bf 109 F-4 (serial number 7690) successfully passed a complete set of flight tests. The aircraft received the USAAF's standard combat pattern and markings. Its tactical number at first was EB-1 and then EB-100.

The test results showed that the Bf 109 F-4 was 70 km/h quicker than the Bf 109E when near land; about one half of the velocity gain was obtained due to the more powerful DB 601E engine, while the other half was a result of better aerodynamics. The fighter's excellent controllability and good manoeuvrability were also noted.

Favourable comments included those praising the plane's easily accessible engine components, especially its plugs, and its well-suited engine cowling. The fighter had various automatic devices, including those regulating water and oil temperature in the engine, which made the aircraft's piloting significantly easier.

A thorough examination of the Bf 109 F-4 showed that the most vulnerable point of the fighter's power unit was the bottom of the engine. Even one shell or incendiary bullet hitting that area was enough to cause a fire. In addition, the Messerschmitt's water and oil coolers were not protected by armour, which turned them into a good target due to these units' large surface area. Two reserve cooling system tanks, mounted in the bottom of the engine, were also good targets.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=bf-109f-4_usa Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

- North American [[P-51 (Family)|P-51]] Mustang
- Kawasaki [[Ki-61 (Family)|Ki-61]]]
- Fiat [[G.55 serie 1|G.55]]
- Macchi [[C.205 serie 1|C.205]]

== External links ==

<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

- [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/155545-messerschmitt-bf-109-f-4/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer BFW}}
{{USA fighters}}
{{USA premium aircraft}}
