{{About
| about = German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Bf 109 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=bf-109f-2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.37]]. Setting the basis for the definitive version of the Bf 109, the F-4, the Bf 109 F-2, alongside the Bf 109 F-1, saw substantial improvement over the earlier Emil series.

The second Bf 109 of the F series in War Thunder, the Bf 109 F-2 plays like the [[Bf 109 F-1]]. Successful F-1 pilots should feel at home with the F-2 almost instantaneously, allowing the player to acquire valuable 109 experience before grabbing the [[Bf 109 F-4]].

As with the F-1, the most notable change of the Friedrich over the Emil is its performance. Having a more aerodynamically efficient design, especially in the nose, the F-2 is identical to the F-1 in its performance, propelled forward by a powerful DB 601 N producing up to 1,175 hp. Reaching speeds to up to 615 km/h at 5.2 km of altitude, the Friedrich is testimony to the trademark acceleration and speed found in the 109s. A powerful climber, the F-2 reaches altitude quickly and can easily outclimb most of its historic counterparts. As with all 109s, the optimal climbing speed is 270 km/h (IAS). As such, the Bf 109 F-2 should largely be played like the Emils, with the added bonus of additional performance making the flying and fighting even easier. As with the Emil, fluid and speedy transitions between altitude and speed, together with well-timed use of flaps, throttle and manoeuvres, enable the Friedrich to quickly change an engagement to its favour.

The most striking change is its main armament. Although the player has had access to a 20 mm cannon with the [[Bf_109_E-3|E-3]] and [[Bf 109 F-1|F-1]], they are now presented with a 15 mm cannon. This may seem a disadvantage at first, but the [[MG 151/15 (15 mm)|15 mm MG 151]] is respectable. While a single shot tends to be less effective than a shot by the MG FF/M's mineshell available on the [[Bf_109_F-1|F-1]], it has some upsides: overall better ballistics and a higher ammo count, sporting 200 rounds instead of the MG FF's characteristic 60 round magazine. Hitting a target no longer takes the extreme care that it does with the F-1, making long-range shooting possible but inadvisable. Despite these advantages, the lower calibre and lack of proper HE ammunition in the 15 mm cannon make it lacklustre in the damage department. Quick, clean kills aren't very common with this armament. Bomber hunting requires hitting the target with some good, steady bursts. Therefore, it is best to take care when engaging a bomber and mind its gunners. The rockets this fighter mounts optionally are an effective weapon to take down well-defended bombers (one hit with a rocket) as well as to pick off ground targets including tanks, but they also cause a lot of drag, degrading the performance.

Regarding the change that the higher battle rating brings to this aircraft, the fighting style shifts a little bit in that an advancement in BR means a shift in the characteristics of its opponents to better-diving, better-climbing, but worse-turning opponents. This means that, in some occasions, sustained turning is a viable option especially against its American counterparts. Diving as a means of escape will often end up with the pilot losing a fight, particularly when facing the heavy, streamlined aircraft of the U.S. line, such as [[F4U (Family)|Corsairs]] or [[P-47 (Family)|Thunderbolts]]. Fighting better climbing opponents means that having an energy advantage at a start of an engagement, obtained by climbing upon spawning, is very important.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 591 || 575 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 18.9 || 19.6 || 16.7 || 16.7 || rowspan="2" | 358
|-
! Upgraded
| 639 || 614 || 17.1 || 18.0 || 24.1 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 408 || 260 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 450 || < 390 || < 450 || > 715
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 4,850 m || 1,050 hp || 1,168 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8 mm Steel - Pilot's seat
* 10 mm Steel - Pilot's headrest
* 60 mm Bulletproof glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (15 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 15 mm MG 151 cannon, nose-mounted (200 rpg)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

The two machine guns are mounted in the upper fuselage just in front of the pilot and fire through the propeller arc. Each are armed with the same amount of ammunition, which means that both guns will fire together until empty. The 15 mm cannon is mounted in the propeller shaft and fires through the propeller hub.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|RZ.65|Flam C 250 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 4 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (200 kg total)
* 8 x RZ.65 rockets
* 1 x 250 kg SC250JA bomb (250 kg total)
* 1 x Flam C 250 incendiary bomb

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Just as the with the E-3, new players should adopt a hit and run tactic with the Bf 109s. While often called BnZ aircraft, the 109s are not dedicated Boom'n'Zoomers and many other aircraft such as the [[Fw 190 (Family)|Fw 190]] do it much better. While it is true that a pure Boom and Zooming approach can be used for the 109s, limiting oneself to this enormously undermines plane efficiency. It is a purebred energy fighter.

Keep in mind that while the B-1 and Emil were respectable turners, the Friedrichs turn somewhat worse, and you should begin to think twice before going into a turning engagement. Should you be shot down often and struggle when fighting enemies with the F-2, consider it a helpful and fair warning: you are most likely using the plane wrongly and need to brush up on your flying before attempting the later 109s that nearly all have tough matchmaking.

While the Bf 109 F-2 loses out on the mine shell of the MG FF/M second cannon of the E-4, it still performs adequately. When necessary, use the [[MG 17 (7.92 mm)|7.92 mm MG 17]] to hose down an enemy or force them to break off from a friendly when you can't get a sure shot in with your cannon. Engaging bombers in the F-2 is a thankless task, since they will most likely soak up a great number of hits. Unless you enjoy being out of ammo and thus defenceless, bombers are just about your lowest priority in the F-2. If you are forced to attack one, aim for its wings, engines and fuel tanks, not the center.

The F-2 can load either 4 x 50 kg or 1 x 250 kg bombs. Unless you like to fly at a severe disadvantage, do not use the bombs unless you have to in order to win a match, for example after refueling/restocking at the base. The bomb load is nowhere near large enough to make a fighter bombing trip worth it. While the 8 x RZ.65 rockets might look enticing, their actual use is next to nothing, only serving to reduce the planes performance. When using AP-heavy ammo belts, the cannon can penetrate light and medium tanks, but time is better spent fighting planes and practising your skills. Additionally, save the bomb unlocks while grinding out the plane until last and focus on performance.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good rate of climb
* Above average speed
* Good ammo load
* Easy to aim 15 mm cannon
* Fair manoeuvrability
* Good performance at altitude
* Ability to mount rockets and bombs
* Ammo counter in the cockpit (useful for SB)
* All weaponry mounted in the nose, allowing easy aiming without having to worry about convergence

'''Cons:'''

* Poor one-burst firepower
* Despite lack of weaknesses, no unmatched strength in any characteristic
* For Sim, the numerous canopy frames and razorback greatly limit the all-round view, and huge engine torque causes severe turning when taking off

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
While the Emil saw combat during the Poland and France campaigns and was used as the mainstream German fighter during the Battle of Britain, it had reached its zenith with the E-4. While arguably still a better performer than its historic counterparts, with enemy planes being either as good or worse than the Emil, Messerschmitt began to re-evaluate the E-design and attempt to improve upon its design. Drawing on data provided by pilots, the industry and in line with the wishes of the German High Command, the Friedrich was developed.

The Bf 109 F saw major improvement over the Bf 109 E. Its complete front section was overhauled with a more streamlined look and a more aerodynamically efficient profile developed. The wings were improved, ending in a semi elliptical design reminiscent of the Spitfire. Due to the various changes, it became heavier than the Emil, yet its DB 601 N engine and the better design allowed it to considerably outperform the Emil.

Just under 1,400 Bf 109 F-2s were built during the war. Several were retrofitted with the MG 151/20 after it became available. A tropicalized version existed, featuring the distinctive filter mounted in front of the air intake.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=bf-109f-2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* North American [[P-51 (Family)|P-51]] Mustang
* Kawasaki [[Ki-61 (Family)|Ki-61]]
* [[IAR-81C|IAR-81]]
* Macchi [[C.205 serie 1|C.205]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/155547-messerschmitt-bf-109-f-1-and-f-2/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* Radinger, Willy & Otto, Wolfgang, Messerschmit Me 109 - Das meistgebaute Jagdflugzeug der Welt - Entwicklung, Erprobung, Technik - Bf 109A bis 109K, Aviatic Verlag, Oberhachingen: 2011
* [http://www.messerschmitt-bf109.de/web.php?lang=de&auth=e&name=bf109b&versionscategory=8 "Falcon's Messerschmitt Bf 109 Hangar" Bf 109F subpage]<br>
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messerschmitt_Bf_109_variants#F-0.2C_F-1.2C_F-2 English Wikipedia: "Messerschmitt Bf 109 variants &ndash; Bf 109 F"]<br>
* [http://kurfurst.org/#Friedrich "Performance Information Bf 109F"]

{{AirManufacturer BFW}}
{{Germany fighters}}