{{Specs-Card
|code=breda_88
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was developed in the mid-'30s as a heavy fighter with a range of 2000km, capable of fast interception against enemy bombers and fighters at high altitude. For the time it was seen as revolutionary, it set up multiple records with the ''prototype'' Ba.88, thus it was a very promising design. It was amazingly fast for its time, and was used as an air racer, too. However after being deployed the aircraft performed much more poorly, due to the added weight of navigation equipment, weapons and other systems, so it never saw use as a heavy fighter/interceptor.

It was introduced in [[Update 1.69 "Regia Aeronautica"]]. In War Thunder the '''{{Specs|name}}''' works as an interceptor, with a decent firepower. However, it does have a few issues, in a straight line it has a good top speed, specially when compared to the biplanes around its BR, but the aircraft is not well suited for high altitude combat due to the poor rate of climb. It comes with a very standard armament for an interceptor, 3 x 12.7mm Breda - SAFAT machine guns that have a good rate of fire and range. Since the flight performance is not the most optimal, the vehicle has to use its good top speed for its advantage, being mainly a support fighter. A good idea is staying away from combat, and picking up slow enemies or helping teammates stuck in a dogfight. Speaking of which, dogfights with this aircraft are not recommended, since it is a very heavy target and it lacks the agility to outperform most aircrafts in a fight.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
With all of the additional necessary gear and equipment added to the first production series after the prototype, the Breda 88 is hopelessly overloaded (137 kg/m² wing-load) and drains any advantage the streamlined design and strong engines grant. In fact on first glance the Lince appears to be quite responsive, featuring late control lock-up speeds and decent roll-rate once spinning. But in this lies the crux of the matter. The aircraft is too heavy, any manoeuvre pulled must change the momentum of the aircraft, hence any steering and course correction is linked to a loss in speed and/or altitude to compensate. It bleeds speed everywhere thus seriously hampering its ability to Boom & Zoom effectively which one would think the Breda is destined for. Crawling to its ground-level top speed of 410 km/h IAS Boom & Run tactics might work against biplanes.

Take off on empty is @ 150 km/h IAS (136 f/s) in 18 s, attempting an Immelmann at top speed will cause the aircraft to stall at its zenith and a Split-S should only be performed with +500 m (1,650 ft.) to spare or else impact with the ground will be a given. When attempting to gain altitude, climbing should be done at ~10° when loaded and @ 12° when empty. These data points were not copied from an Italian medium bomber, but rather are a show of inferiority compared to any other attacker at its battle rating. On the bright side, the difference between full and empty payload is minuscule.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,600 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 476 || 462 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 29.9 || 30.9 || 6.0 || 5.9 || rowspan="2" | 730
|-
! Upgraded
| 504 || 490 || 28.1 || 29.0 || 9.3 || 7.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 388 || 283 || ~9 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 360 || < 320 || < 400 || > 200
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 4,000 m || 1,000 hp || N/A
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

Designed to outrun any interceptors, the designers at Breda opted to forego any kind of armour protection. A shame that the Lince cannot do that. While the central fuselage tank may shield from a few pursuit shots, any frontal attacks are very likely to take out the entire crew in a single burst. This aircraft lacks in manoeuvrability leading to an overall short service life both in real life and game. Though the radial engines are rather resilient, not that it improves the survivability much.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Breda-SAFAT (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 3 x 12.7 mm Breda-SAFAT machine guns, nose-mounted (375 rpg top + 425 rpg middle + 450 rpg bottom = 1,250 total)

The three heavy machine guns are arranged and located in the nose of the aircraft. Usually, the slow firing Breda HMGs are a lacklustre affair, but the addition of a third gun elevates the firepower to just mediocre. Each is armed with different amounts of ammunition, which when firing will run empty at different times. Using tracer belts with one of the guns is a very handy visual feedback in Simulator Battles and a neat visual gimmick in other [[:Category:Game modes|game modes]].<br>

Both "Air Targets" and "Stealth" belts are great against aircraft with their IAI-bullets (high explosive rounds), albeit their fuses may not trigger on the canvas skins of biplanes. Against ground targets, the API-T only "Tracer" belt is recommended.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|GP 50 (50 kg)|GP 100 (100 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 3 x 50 kg GP 50 bombs (150 kg total)
* 3 x 100 kg GP 100 bombs (300 kg total)

In Realistic and Simulator battles the outer bomb pair drops first with a second drop available for the central third bomb. Due to the aircraft's slow change of momentum, any dive bombing attempt below 600 m (2,000 ft) may result in unplanned self-destruction. Unfortunately, no bombsight with this attacker is available, nor does it feature a floor window for target acquisition. The plane's handling hardly changes with the payloads so the triple 100 kg one is always recommended.

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Breda-SAFAT (7.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 7.7 mm Breda-SAFAT machine gun, dorsal turret (500 rpg)

Provides rear cover from enemy fighters which will try to knock you out. The 7.7 mm has a limited firing arc. However, controlling the aircraft allows it to be compensated for. It is best to aim for the engine and fight deck of the enemy fighter to knock it out.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The Breda Ba.88 (P.XI) should be used to attack ground targets, for aerial manoeuvres it simply lacks the grace or flying ability necessary. Yet even ground strafing can be difficult due to sluggishness and even deadly as the pilot is extremely vulnerable. Try to avoid enemy planes if possible, as any enemy that engages on its own accords may prove to be fatal. Also note the Ba.88 can carry bombs but does not have air brakes or bombsights, so one must manually slow down and estimate the payload release on target.<br>

Few viable ways of engaging enemy aircraft exist and all rely on surprising the hostile vehicle. Gaining altitude and diving on the enemy ("Boom") and then either climbing ("Zoom") or running away in level flight are recommended. Albeit this heavy fighter will greatly lose speed in any manoeuvre hence any correction for leading the target should be avoided. Bombers and other aircraft with defensive armament should be avoided entirely.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Tremendous fuel load (33 minutes of fuel is the minimum)
* Reasonable armament with a high chance of igniting fuel tanks
* Payloads have almost no performance penalty
* Payloads are useful for attacking light tanks, artillery, AAA, and vehicles such as armoured cars

'''Cons:'''

* Flying brick of an attacker
** Poor roll rate, turn time, rate of climb, top speed and anything really
** Will get absolutely murdered in a turn fight
* Lack of any armour for protection
* Plane is prone to pilot snipe
* Poor defensive armament
* Does not have bombsight
* Deadweight in the line-up

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The Breda Ba.88 was an Italian heavy fighter bomber that was made for the Regia Aeronautica's 1936 requirement for a twin-engine heavy fighter capable of 329 mph, 2,000 km range, and capable of carrying 20 mm cannons. It made its debut around late 1936 to 1937 and during its evaluation, it was a promising design. Standard firepower of the plane was three 12.7 mm Breda SAFAT machine guns in the nose and a gunner in the dorsal turret with a 7.7 mm Breda SAFAT machine gun. The prototype aircraft flew with two Isotta-Fraschini K14 series while production models of the plane had two Piaggio P.XI RC.40 "Stella" 14-cylinder air-cooled radial engines capable of 1,000 hp each, setting several new world speed records in 1937, with speeds in the 550 km/h range. By 1938-39 the Breda Ba.88 came into production but it would be retired in 1941 with only 149 made, after only brief service in Libya in the summer of 1940. The plane was found to perform much more poorly with an operational bombload and unsuitable for the designated role of heavy fighter/assault.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=breda_88 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|ry8QOqpVzFs|'''Realistic: Breda 88 (P.XI) [Fun Times]''' - ''Jengar''|yVnlvK4kcJI|'''Breda Ba.88 - The Sky Police!''' - ''Bo Time Gaming''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

* [[Do 17 Z-7]]
* [[Yak-2 KABB]]
* [[J1N1]]
* [[Ba.65 (K.14) L]]
* [[Br.693AB2]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/363495-breda-ba88-lince/ Breda Ba.88 discussion thread]
* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/364960-breda-88-pxi/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [[wikipedia:Breda_Ba.88|[Wikipedia] Breda Ba.88]]
* [[wt:en/news/4696-development-ba-88-lince-a-wild-spirit-en|[Devblog] Breda Ba.88 Lince: A Wild Spirit]]

{{AirManufacturer Breda}}
{{Italy strike aircraft}}