{{About
| about = German bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Do 217 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=do_217e_2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.29]].

The Dornier Do 217 E-2 is a versatile twin-engined heavy bomber, capable of undertaking level bombing or dive bombing missions, or even strafing or attacking other aircraft with its fixed forward-firing 20 mm cannon.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
The twin tail design limits yaw manoeuvres, and the rudders locks up at at high speed, making the plane more difficult to control.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,100 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 464 || 449 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 32.2 || 33.4 || 6.1 || 6.0 || rowspan="2" | 850
|-
! Upgraded
| 500 || 482 || 29.9 || 31.0 || 10.2 || 8.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 351 || 270 || ~7 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 290 || < 360 || < 360 || > 315
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8.5 mm steel - pilot's seat
* 8.5 mm steel - around the dorsal gunner
* 8.5 mm steel - aft of ventral gunner
* 5 mm steel - below ventral gunner

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, chin-mounted (225 rpg)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|SC500K (500 kg)|SC1000L2 (1,000 kg)}}
{{main|Flam C 250 incendiary|Flam C 500 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 4 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 28 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (1,400 kg total)
* 8 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 500 kg SC500K bombs + 2 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 4 x 500 kg SC500K bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 4 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs (4,000 kg total)
* 4 x Flam C 250 incendiary bombs
* 8 x Flam C 250 incendiary bombs
* 4 x Flam C 500 incendiary bombs

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 131 (13 mm)|MG 15 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, dorsal turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, ventral turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 7.92 mm MG 15 machine gun, nose turret (375 rpg)
* 1 x 7.92 mm MG 15 machine gun, 2 x dorsal beam turret (600 rpg left, 525 rpg right)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The Do 217 E-2 is capable of reaching over 700 km/h in a dive, making it extremely difficult to intercept when dive bombing from altitude. It has a good climb rate as well, allowing it to reach safer altitudes more easily than other lumbering heavy bombers. Unfortunately, the Do 217 has a rather poor roll rate, which makes it difficult to manoeuvre, especially when fully loaded.

It is capable of carrying four of the excellent German 1,000 kg bombs, which are more powerful than the equivalent bombs of other nations. While other nations may be able to carry more bombs, they usually carry a larger number of smaller bombs, which is less efficient against bases and airfields. As an added bonus, the Do 217 E-2 is also armed with a fixed forward-firing MG 151/20 cannon. This allows it to surprise fighters attempting to head-on the bomber or even to act as a makeshift bomber interceptor since it spawns at the same altitude as other bombers in modes with air spawns.

The defensive armament is the only true letdown of the Do 217. The dorsal MG 131 turret is well-placed to cover the top of the bomber from most attacks, although it is not as effective as the American .50 cal. There are a lot of blind spots not covered by the defensive machine guns, most of which are the relatively ineffective 7.92 mm MG 15 anyway.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* High speed, especially in a dive
* Frame can withstand high speeds
* Excellent bomb load (4 x 1,000 kg)
* Horizontal and dive bombing sights
* 20 mm offensive cannon
* Tail-dragging landing gear (good for high-speed landings)

'''Cons:'''

* Low manoeuvrability (especially roll rate at high speeds)
* Very weak stock bomb load
* Poor defensive armament
* Low cruising speed flying level or climbing
* Hard to engage targets on the horizontal axis due to poor roll rate and poor rudder control (especially at high speeds)

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The Do 217 was designed to meet the requirement of the ''Reichsluftfahrtministerium'' (Air Ministry) for a heavy night bomber or a float-equipped anti-shipping dive bomber. Dornier experimented with the Do 17 with an enlarged fuselage, more powerful engine and almost twice the bomb load of the original Do 17. Dive brakes were fitted under the wings with Daimler-Benz DB601B engines. This design proved underpowered and manoeuvrable. Instability was a problem, this was soon fixed by installing Handley Page Leading edge slats. The final version used Jumo 211A engines instead of the DB601 and the proposed DB603. Different tail sections were tested out on this version of the Do 217. The final design entered service as the Do 217 E-2. With BMW 801A 14 cylinder radial air-cooled engines. This version of the Do 217 did not have tail mounted dive-brakes. The engine unit was interchangeable with Jumo 211 engines as part of the "Power Egg" concept. The Do 217 normally carries a crew of four: bomb-aimer/observer/forward gunner, dorsal gunner/radio operator, ventral gunner/flight engineer, and a pilot. The dive brake in the original version was removed.

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Dornier Do 217 E-2 medium twin-engine bomber

An all-metal cantilever monoplane with a twin-fin tail and a retractable landing gear system with a tail wheel. The bomber was created in the design bureau of the Dornier Flugzeugwerke company under the direction of Claude Dornier.

In 1937, the German Ministry of Aviation (Reichsluftfahrtministerium) put forward an initiative to create a new, improved variant of the Do 17Z bomber. The new machine would have an increased bomb capacity and a larger fuel supply and would be able to drop bombs when diving.

The aircraft was at first developed as an upgrade of the Do 17Z design, but such novel ideas were introduced during the redesign that the result was a fundamentally new design with practically nothing in common with its predecessor. The Do 217 V1 prototype was test-flown in August 1938. Full-scale production of the Do 217 E-1, the first production version, was launched in late 1940.

The power unit of the Do 217 E-2 aircraft consisted of two BMW 801 ML fourteen-cylinder, radial air-cooled engines with a takeoff power of 1,580 hp.

In comparison with the Do 17Z, the Do 217 E-2's defensive armament was significantly improved. The planes were equipped with an upper DL 131 electric turret containing a 13 mm Rheinmetall-Borsig MG 131 belt-fed machine gun with 500 rounds. The turret had 360-degree horizontal rotation, with its vertical guidance angle ranging from 0 to 85 degrees.

In addition to the DL 131 turret, the aircraft's defensive armament included one 15 mm (or 20 mm) Mauser MG 151/15 cannon with 250 rounds in a nose-mounted fixed turret (designed for firing at surface targets) and one 7.92 mm Rheinmetall-Borsig MG 15 machine gun (with 750 rounds) in a nose-mounted mobile turret. A large-calibre 13 mm Rheinmetall-Borsig MG 131 machine gun was installed in a lower lens turret, and each of the two cockpit side blisters had one 7.92 mm Rheinmetall-Borsig MG 15 machine gun.

The Do 217 E-2 could be fitted with an R23 field modification kit, consisting of two fixed twin 7.92 mm Mauser MG 81Z machine guns, with 350 rounds each, in the tail section of the fuselage. The pilot fired from them using a RF2C periscope and a PV1B sight, but the fire from this turret had more of a psychological than a real effect.

The aircraft could carry up to 4,000 kg of bombs, with 2,517 kg suspended in the internal bomb bay. The standard bomb capacity included four 500 kg or eight 250 kg bombs. Other combat load variations were also possible; for example, two LMA aerial non-contact sea mines or one LTF5b torpedo.

A combined total of 185 Do 217 E-2s were built.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=do_217e_2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/436320-do217e-24/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [[wikipedia:Dornier_Do_217|[Wikipedia] Dornier Do 217 series]]

{{AirManufacturer Dornier}}
{{Germany bombers}}