{{About
| about = German twin-engine fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Do 217 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=do_217n_1
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German twin-engine fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.29]].

The Do 217 N-1 is a classic heavy fighter with tremendous firepower, but poor flight performance. It can function as a ground attack aircraft (strafing enemy ground targets and/or using the bombs that it can carry) or be used as an interceptor (in a primarily anti-bomber role).

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,500 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 495 || 477 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 28.9 || 30.2 || 4.7 || 4.6 || rowspan="2" | 800
|-
! Upgraded
| 539 || 515 || 26.4 || 27.7 || 9.3 || 6.8
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 351 || 270 || ~9 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 290 || < 360 || < 360 || > 311
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8.5 mm Steel - Fore-cockpit plate
* 8.5 mm Steel - Pilot's seat
* 50 mm Bulletproof Glass
* 8.5 mm Steel - Dorsal gunner's plate
* 5 mm Steel - Belly gunner's plate
* 8.5 mm Steel - Belly gunner's upper plate
* 5 mm Steel - Engine armour plate x 2
* 5 mm Steel - Aft plate

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 4 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, chin-mounted (200 rpg = 800 total)
* 4 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (1,000 rpg = 4,000 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 8 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (400 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 131 (13 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, dorsal turret (500 rpg)
* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, ventral turret (500 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The Do 217 N-1 is yet another "Zerstörer" heavy fighter in the German tech tree. It is functionally a [[Do 217 J-2]] with the MG FF/M cannons having been replaced with the faster firing, high velocity 20 mm MG 151/20 cannons. With that being said however, it has the exact same strengths and weaknesses as the J-2. That's to say it has an amazing armament for its battle rating, but lacks the manoeuvrability and speed to use it effectively, especially in a dogfight.

The Do 217 N-1 should be treated like an even more polarised version of the [[Bf 110 C-7]], with an even bigger commitment to Boom and Zoom tactics since it has very poor manoeuvrability. That means keeping a significant altitude superiority over your enemies is paramount to success, in order to dive on them and destroy them in a single pass before using the speed to climb back up to altitude where any potential enemies hopefully won't be able to follow you. Keep in mind however that the Do 217 N-1's battle rating means you may be pitted against faster fighters (like the [[P-47 (Family)|P-47]] or the [[P-39Q-5|P-39Q]]) that can catch up to you if they dive on you during a zoom climb, if they have an altitude advantage.

Against a Do 217 N-1, never go head-on with this plane because the heavy firepower of 4 x 20 mm MG 151/20 cannons and 4 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns will shred any plane head on and it is very hard to pilot snipe this plane frontally as there is a lot of bulletproof glass and armour protecting the pilot. If you encounter a Do 217 N-1 attack it from above, behind or below the aircraft.

=== Radar ===
{{main|FuG 202}}
The Do 217 N-1 is equipped with a [[FuG 202]] search radar, located in the nose of the aircraft; a control box which is part of the radar damage model is located behind the pilot.
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
! colspan="4" | [[FuG 202]] - Target Detection Radar
|-
! {{Annotation|Maximum<br/>Detection<br/>Range|The maximum possible range at which a target can be detected}}
! {{Annotation|Guaranteed<br/>Detection<br/>Range|The range, below which, detection of a target is practically guaranteed}}
! {{Annotation|Max Azimuth<br/>Scan Angle|How far to each side the radar can scan (widest search mode)}}
! {{Annotation|Max Elevation<br/>Scan Angle|How far up and down the radar can scan (widest search mode)}}
|-
| 4,000 m || 4,000 m || ±30° || ±30°
|-
|}

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Very deadly nose-mounted armament (4 x 20 mm cannons and 4 x 7.92 mm MGs) with fast fire rate, great one-second burst mass, destructive damage, flexible belt types and plenty of ammo (200 RPG for the cannons, 1,000 RPG for the MGs). This makes it excellent at head-on attacks against any aircraft, especially bombers and attackers
* Rigid construction that can take a lot of punishment from MG fire. It also barely catches fire
* Decent defensive armament consisting of 2 x 13 mm MG 131 turrets, with reasonable coverage and adequate damage
* Has access to a target detection radar which most planes don't have. Rather useful in clouds or with bad weather or low visibility
* Decent dive acceleration allowing it to easily dive at more than 500 km/h, outrunning slower opponents like the I-16 and F4F
* Improved ballistic performance of the 20 mm MG 151 over the FF/M allows for firing both the machine guns and cannons at the same time and hit the target accurately
* The 20 mm AP shells, its huge ammo capacity and the 8 x 50 kg bombs give it ground pounding ability to some extent
* Its appearance and name are very identical to its bomber variants. The player can sometimes utilise this and lure the unprepared enemy into a surprising head-on

'''Cons:'''

* Extremely poor manoeuvrability. Turn time is more than 27 second even when upgraded, meaning it might get out-turned by attackers like the IL-2, A-20G or even bombers like the B-25
* Control surfaces tend to lock up at more than 500 km/h. Due to this, when diving it might not be able to pull up in time, or cannot pull the lead properly
* Poor climb rate and energy retention makes it hard to intercept high-flying bombers
* Poor roll rate makes it hard to respond to offensive / defensive manoeuvres (e.g. scissors). The I-16 now becomes a deadly opponent due to its superior roll rate
* Its poor flight performance makes it thoroughly difficult to effectively combat other fighters
* Is a big target which is easy to get hit
* The 20 mm nose-mounted cannons and 13 mm turrets are quite inaccurate without the corresponding modifications unlocked

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The Dornier Do 217 is a multi-role aircraft (bomber, reconnaissance aircraft, night fighter) built for the Luftwaffe during World War 2. It is very similar to many previous Dornier built bombers, such as the Dornier Do 17, in its 'Flying Pencil' shape and fuselage. Overall 1,925 Dornier Do 217s were made as well as many variants. The Do 217 J and Do 217 N variants were mainly used as night fighters to deal with the RAF's nightly bombing raids. The rest of the variants would be used as bombers or reconnaissance aircraft depending on which mission they would be on.

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Dornier Do 217 N-1 night twin-engine fighter.

At the same time the Do 217M bomber was created, Dornier Flugzeugwerke also developed the Do 217N night fighter to enable the installation of DB 603A engines. The first prototype got off the ground in July 1942.

Production Do 217 N-1 night fighters were armed with 20 mm Mauser MG 151/20 cannons (belt-fed, with 200 rounds each), which had a high rate of fire and better ballistic characteristics, instead of 20 mm Oerlikon MG FF/M cannons.

Four additional 20 mm Mauser MG 151/20 cannons could be installed, inclined in a so-called Schräge Musik mount in the upper section of the aircraft. "Schräge Musik" literally means "oblique (or weird) music", which was a colloquial name for "abnormal" jazz in Germany of that period. The Schräge Musik mount was implemented via the removable R22 factory kit and included fuselage-mounted cannons that fired upward and forward at a 70-degree angle. Oberleutnant Rudolf Schoenert, an ace of night fighter aviation, had developed the idea.

The Schräge Musik mount allowed a night fighter to attack a bomber from below, that is at their belly, which was the least-protected area of the plane. Although the Schräge Musik mount increased the aircraft's takeoff weight, its combat effectiveness justified this disadvantage.

Since the plane's defensive armament was recognized as unnecessary for the night fighter, some planes had their upper turret removed and their lower gun position terminated. The projection for the lower turret was then removed with the help of a long wooden fairing. These modifications reduced the night fighter's weight and improved its aerodynamics. The planes that were modified in this way were designated Do 217 N-1/U1.

The standard package of the Do 217 N-1 included a FuG 202 Lichtenstein B/C airborne radar. In addition, the plane had a FuG 25 or FuG 25a identification friend or foe transponder housed in the rear section of the left nacelle.

The rear bomb bay was retained on Do 217 N-1 night fighters, to leave the option open for them to be used as "night hunters".

The total production volume for Do 217 N-1 night fighters was small, amounting to only 95 aircraft.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=do_217n_1 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|MNacjyimuCQ|'''The Shooting Range #95''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 12:02 discusses the Do 217 N-1.}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/436317-do217n-12/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [https://www.militaryfactory.com/aircraft/detail.asp?aircraft_id=543 [Military Factory<nowiki>]</nowiki> Dornier Do 217]

{{AirManufacturer Dornier}}
{{Germany twin-engine fighters}}