{{About
| about = German strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Do 335 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=do_335a_0
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.57 "Battle March"]]. This pre-production run does not feature payload options, unlike the [[Do 335 A-1|A-1 series]]. Fortunately, this difference is favourable for the A-0 as it features superior aerodynamics and henceforth better top speed, despite only running on the 50PS weaker DB603A (PS = metric horsepower).

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
Contrary to popular belief, the Do 335 is not a "super prop". The initial design was a "Schnellbomber" (speedy bomber), but with the start of the emergency fighter program, most bomber contracts were shelved to increase fighter production. At Dornier, the idea arose to reconfigure the current bomber design into a heavy fighter to exploit the failure of Focke Wulf's [[Ta 154 A-1|Ta 154]].

Consequently, flight agility is mediocre, lending itself in feeling to Dornier's previous heavy fighters: [[Do 17 Z-7|Do 17 Z-7]] and [[Do 217 N-1|Do 217N]], both of which were also originally designed as bombers. The exception to this trait is the fantastic roll rate, accomplished by boosted ailerons as seen on the [[Ta 152 H-1]].{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 8,400 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 746 || 727 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 28.3 || 29.3 || 8.2 || 8.2 || rowspan="2" | 500
|-
! Upgraded
| 805 || 775 || 25.8 || 27.0 || 16.4 || 11.8
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 386 || 280 || ~9 || ~4
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 380 || < 340 || < 400 || > 440
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 7,070 m || 1,440 hp || 1,642 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 8,300 m || 1,430 hp || 1,630 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 3
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 9,200 m || 1,420 hp || 1,619 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8 mm Steel - fuel tank/pilot seat plate

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MK 103 (30 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 30 mm MK 103 cannon, nose-mounted (70 rpg)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 151 (15 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 2 x 15 mm MG 151 cannons, nose-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)
* 2 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, nose-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

Boom & Zoom: While it does not have the capability to turn, accelerate or climb (sustained) quickly as might an energy fighting aircraft, it can be used to make quick, swooping attacks on enemy bombers, and in a limited capacity, fighters. Advantaged by its swift dive acceleration, Boom & Zoom is a viable tactic; however, it should be noted that prolonged engagements with enemy aircraft should be avoided, as energy fighters will quickly deplete its momentum, and turn-fighting aircraft will easily outmanoeuvre this lumbering aircraft. Instead, diving on a target with a lower energy state (it is permissible to engage some slower aircraft in level flight as the 335 can reach speeds well in excess of 450 km/h within seconds of levelling the aircraft out of a climb) and then simply running away and zoom climbing out of range if the target is not killed on the first run is a significant advantage for Do 335 pilots who wish to return home alive. It may take several runs to kill a target, even with the heavy armament possessed by this aircraft, however momentum conservation is a key advantage of the 335, and multiple swooping attack runs disallow slow, "walking" adjustment of fire by bomber turrets, and can deny a turn-fighter an opportunity to attack, and potentially significantly drain them of energy. Targets in a higher energy state (More altitude and/or speed) should not be engaged unless you can ensure that once you have followed through with the attack run, you will be moving fast enough to avoid retaliation by the target.

Made a problematic aircraft to master by its poor manoeuvrability, both anti-bomber operations and ground strafing are a challenging task in this aircraft; however, it does have bomb capacity for 1,000 kg of ordnance and considering its speed, it is moderately capable in the role of a medium or strategic bomber aircraft. Subsequently, the ability to disrupt soft (20 mm) and hard (30 mm) ground targets far away from the initial fighter onslaught does provide some redemption for its poor anti-aircraft capabilities.

The Do 335's design flaws make it particularly inept at chasing other planes. It is nigh-impossible to try to aim while performing a dive since the nose dances around in all directions and provides no stability to the aiming reticle. Indeed, aiming at the enemy while climbing is prone to the same inaccuracy. Trying to roll the wings to enter a quick dive, e.g. to escape an approaching enemy, is more akin to turning a ship than a heavy fighter. During ground attacks, its inability to aim properly makes more of a "spray and pray" than an accurate firing platform. The most useful approach would be to dive on bombers and attempt to hit with the 30 mm cannon at a distance.

====Counter-Tactics====
<!--What to expect, if it would be in command of the enemy and how to counter it. (i.e. They will most likely BnZ, etc.)-->
The Do 335 is fast in a dive but flies like a brick. Out-turning it is easy with almost any fighter. Due to the centre-mounted cannons, it is best to avoid head-on confrontations. Luring the Do 335 into an energy trap is a very effective method of being able to land a hit on the plane, but be cautious as the speed and acceleration of this plane flying level and diving is very good for its size. Most other planes at this BR will have a very hard time to keep up with the Do 335. Lightly firing a few rounds at the plane as it is running will cause them to bleed speed by manoeuvring and can make it easier to catch up. It is not always a good idea to pursue this aircraft even if you are slightly faster, as it will still take quite a while to catch up. This means that they may lure you towards enemy AA, or enemy defensive aircraft. In simulator battles, it is also best to sneak up on this plane before fully opening fire as its visibility to the rear is poor. Crippling the rear engine first will make the Do 335 a much easier target to hunt as speed attributes will be cut in half. Approaching from the bottom is also another very effective method as it is a very wide target from the bottom. The roll rate of the Do 335 is also exceptional, do not lead your shots too far ahead, as you may need to compensate much more and run the risk of losing the Do 335 due to its high speed, it is much more effective to hit the rear of the plane first.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Combined || Not controllable<br>3 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* High top speed at very high altitudes and in a dive
* Heavy nose-mounted armament
* Excellent energy retention and roll rate
* Access to HVAP rounds for the MK 103 against ground targets
* Can fly notably well (and even climb) with one engine
* Strike aircraft spawn

'''Cons:'''

* Poor climb rate, handling, and very poor manoeuvrability
* Expensive repair cost
* No combat flaps
* Poor cockpit visibility, especially to the rear
* Vulnerable to engine damage due to engines mounted in both the front and rear

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
Redeveloped as a multi-role fighter in late 1942 after the original design as a bomber was cancelled, the Do 335 ''Pfeil'' carried a pair of the largest piston engines Germany created during WWII, the DB603 series of inverted V12. The inline design was intended to give dual-engine power but without the parasitic drag that the usual wing-mounted arrangement suffered. By May of 1944, the Do 335 was recognized as such a superior aircraft, with good handling and unmatched speed, that Hitler ordered maximum priority to be given to its production. But Allied bombing campaigns forced Dornier to bring up a new plant to handle production, and the delay meant less than 30 of the aircraft were built and flown before the end of the war.

Only one Do 335 survives today: an A-0 variant, currently on display at the Udvar-Hazy National Air and Space Museum near Dulles Airport in Virginia, USA.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=do_335a_0 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|INb9VjLxKf0|'''Most unusual aircraft''' discusses the {{PAGENAME}} at 5:02 - ''War Thunder Official Channel''}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/devblog/current/864|[Devblog] A Rare Bird - Do 335]]
* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/402957-dornier-do-335/ <nowiki>[WT Forum Datasheet]</nowiki> Dornier Do 335 A-0]

{{AirManufacturer Dornier}}
{{Germany strike aircraft}}