{{About
| about = German bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Do 217 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=do_217e_4
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.29]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,100 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 464 || 448 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 32.2 || 33.4 || 6.1 || 6.0 || rowspan="2" | 850
|-
! Upgraded
| 500 || 482 || 29.9 || 31.0 || 10.2 || 8.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 351 || 270 || ~7 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 290 || < 360 || < 360 || > 315
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8.5 mm steel - pilot's seat
* 8.5 mm steel - around the dorsal gunner
* 8.5 mm steel - aft of ventral gunner
* 5 mm steel - below ventral gunner

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, chin-mounted (225 rpg)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|SC500K (500 kg)|SC1000L2 (1,000 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 4 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 28 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (1,400 kg total)
* 8 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 500 kg SC500K bombs + 2 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 4 x 500 kg SC500K bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 4 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs (4,000 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG FF/M (20 mm)|MG 131 (13 mm)|MG 15 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 20 mm MG FF/M cannon, nose turret (240 rpg)
* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, dorsal turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, ventral turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 7.92 mm MG 15 machine gun, 2 x frontal beam turrets (525 rpg left + 400 rpg right)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The {{PAGENAME}} spawns at a significantly lower altitude than long-range bombers making it easier prey for fighter and attacker aircraft. Climbing to high altitude takes a long time which makes it difficult to avoid enemy fighters in the process. The high speed of the plane and high wing-break speed allows for more aggressive moves at the start of a match. Diving for enemy bases instead of climbing can be a surprisingly effective tactic, especially since many fighter pilots don't want to give up their altitude advantage to drop down and scrape the deck just to hunt a low flying bomber.

The defensive armament is adequate to hold off a single fighter and the 20 mm cannons often cause critical hits forcing the attacker to wave off and retreat.

The plane can perform surprisingly tight elevator turns which can take an attacker by surprise and can give you the chance to use your offensive 20 mm cannon. Performing these manoeuvres at low altitude however, is not recommended as the aircraft loses a lot of speed when performing tight turns and has difficulty to regain the speed risking the {{PAGENAME}} of stalling.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good and accurate defensive armament
* Having an offensive 20 mm autocannon is really good
* Good max speed and acceleration
* Engines rarely overheat when upgraded
* Very nice climb rate and turn rate
* Can carry up to 4 x 1,000 kg bombs, which can be used to destroy 3 bases
* Easy to land
* Always WEP when you have upgraded the engine parts
* Can compete with some bombers at high altitudes, so after the bombing runs, you can search for bombers and stop them

'''Cons:'''

* Very loud engines
* Flaps easily get damaged at +250 km/h. You will lose the landing flaps really easy
* The gunners can easily be knocked out by the enemy fire
* Oil leak and fuel leak for just a few shots (even with 12.7 mm bullets)
* The plane gets uncontrollable at high speeds
* Any damage to the central area of the plane body will cause loss of speed
* Any damage to flaps makes the aircraft really hard to land
* When stock, about 10s of WEP will cause overheating (may differ in altitudes)

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Dornier Do 217 E-4 medium twin-engine bomber

Late 1941 saw the start of production of Do 217 E-4 variant bombers, which differed from the E-2 mainly in their new BMW 801C engines, with a takeoff power of 1,560 hp, and in their wings' reinforced leading edge, which could cut through the cables of barrage balloons. In addition, the fixed Mauser MG 151/15 cannon was removed, and a mobile 20 mm Oerlikon/Ikaria MG FF drum-fed cannon with a total 240-round magazine capacity was installed instead. This cannon earned a reputation as a more effective weapon against surface targets.

Originally, all Do 217E planes were equipped with an umbrella-shaped dive brake located in the tail section and designed to reduce diving speed. However, since the brake was unreliable, every factory-produced machine was packaged with a removable tail cone fairing, placed in the bomb bay. After the aircraft reached the front lines, the mechanics would, as a rule, immediately remove the lattice umbrella and install the cone fairing instead.

In this form, the Do 217E could only be used as a horizontal bomber. But since the dive brake control circuit remained in place, the possibility to convert it back to a dive bomber remained.

Beginning with the Do 217 E-4 variant, no dive brake was installed on the aircraft at all, since the Luftwaffe command eventually rejected the idea of turning the Do 217E into a dive bomber.

Initially, British cities and ships were top-priority targets for the Do 217Es. The KG 2 bomber squadron was given the task of striking cities, and the specially formed KG 40 was to carry out anti-ship missions. Both units were to be based on airfields in France and the Netherlands.

The Do 217E's combat début over Great Britain took place in the middle of July 1941, when KG 2 and KG 40 aircraft bombed London targets and factories in Birmingham.

In the spring of 1942, the Do 217Es of both squadrons participated in the so-called Baedeker Raids, a series of raids over provincial British cities with a large number of architectural monuments. This was a kind of revenge for the RAF's bombing of German cities.

Clear or moonlit nights were usually chosen for the raids, and the crews planned to fly out towards the target at about one o'clock a.m. The smaller cities without strategic importance had poor air defence systems, which allowed the bomber crews to drop their bomb load from a height of about 3,000 m, with comparatively high accuracy for horizontal bombers.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=do_217e_4 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/436320-do217e-24/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Dornier}}
{{Germany bombers}}