{{Specs-Card
|code=f_20a
|store=13237
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
Due to export restrictions by the Department of Defence preventing sales of advanced avionics and aircraft to export customers, many allies who were flying the now out-dated F-5 could not purchase the latest F-16 aircraft to meet the threat of the latest MiG-29s and Su-27s that Soviet allies were receiving. As a result, Northrop Grumman initiated the FX program, to design and build a new 4th light export generation fighter on the basis of the cancelled F-5F Super Tiger. The primary requirements for this new fighter were cheap interoperability with existing F-5 fleets, BVR capability, and modular compatibility with almost every kind of ordnance the US offered for export at the time. The resulting aircraft, the '''F-20 Tigershark''', was essentially an F-5E with a special radar capable of firing the AIM-7 Sparrow missile, and the two small engines of the F-5 family being replaced with a single F-404 engine similar to that of the F/A-18 Hornet. The resulting aircraft was slated to become the export standard for most NATO allies of the time, with Japan, West Germany, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan, and various other close allies eyeing the Tigershark for potential purchase. However, under the Reagan Administration, new export laws were passed which lifted most of the technology export bans, and as a result of further political meddling from the US and General Dynamics, the F-20 saw all its sale chances falter and fall through, with almost every country instead buying F-16s or F-15s (or in the case of Germany, simply upgrading their existing F-4F fleet to carry the new AIM-120 AMRAAM).

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was introduced in [[Update "Alpha Strike"]]. Being essentially an up-engined F-5E with better avionics, it plays exactly as one would expect it. It is one of the best dogfighters of its battle rating, and is only beaten by the F-16s and in some flight regimes the Mirage 2000. As a result, players looking for buying this aircraft should be expected to know how to properly dogfight, manage their energy, and employ their radar correctly to best the enemy aircraft. The incredible choice of ground ordnance also provides a nice alternative to the [[F-16A|F-16A Block 10]] in mixed battles. All in all, the F-20 is a great premium for researching the ranks of the US tree, and in terms of gameplay acts as a nice in-between for the two F-16s at the same BR in the American tree, having the AIM-7s and BVR capability of the F-16A ADF, while also having the guided ground ordnance of the F-16A Block 10.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
The F-20 is a similar experience in terms of flight performance compared to the F-5C, with great energy retention and turn rate above Mach 0.85. However, due to the F404-100, it has plenty of thrust compared to the lacklustre thrust of the F5C.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max speed<br>(km/h at 11,582 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 2,149 || 2,121 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 22.5 || 22.7 || 221 || 210 || rowspan="2" | 850
|-
! Upgraded
| 2,254 || 2,200 || 21.5 || 22.0 || 291 || 255
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || ✓     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 1,458 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 1,296 || 473 || 463 || ~12 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < ___ || < ___ || < ___ || N/A
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="4" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="2" | {{Annotation|Basic mass|Mass of the aircraft with pilot and engine oil, but no fuel or weapons load}} || colspan="2" | Wing loading (full fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | General Electric F404-GE-100 || 1
| colspan="2" | _,___ kg || colspan="2" | ___ kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="3" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load) || rowspan="2" | {{Annotation|Max Gross<br>Weight|Mass of the fully equipped aircraft with heaviest weapons load}}
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! _m fuel || __m fuel || __m fuel
|-
| 1,015 kg || colspan="2" | Afterburning low-bypass turbofan
| _,___ kg || _,___ kg || _,___ kg || _,___ kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB/SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="4" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (___%/WEP)
|-
! Condition || 100% || ___%/WEP
! _m fuel || __m fuel || __m fuel || MGW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || ___ kgf || ___ kgf
| _.__ || _.__ || _.__ || _.__
|-
| ''Optimal'' || ___ kgf<br>(_ km/h) || ___ kgf<br>(_ km/h)
| _.__ || _.__ || _.__ || _.__
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armor ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->
The F-20 is a light fighter. As such it has no armour. If it loses its wing or tail, it becomes incredibly difficult to fly. It isn't that durable against common cannons for its BR, however it's possible to survive smaller IR missiles but the plane would no longer be combat capable and should immediately return to the base.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="5" | [[Ballistic Computer]]
|-
! CCIP (Guns) !! CCIP (Rockets) !! CCIP (Bombs) !! CCRP (Bombs) !! EEGS
|-
| {{Tick}} || {{Tick}} || {{Tick}} || {{Tick}} || {{Tick}}
|-
|}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M39A3 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm M39A3 cannons, nose-mounted (280 rpg = 560 total)
* 45 x countermeasures

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.''

{{Navigation-Start|Default weapon presets}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}

* Without load
* 6 x AIM-9L Sidewinder missiles
* 2 x AIM-7F Sparrow missiles
* 5 x 750 lb M117 cone 45 bombs (3,750 lb total)
* 9 x 500 lb LDGP Mk 82 bombs (4,500 lb total)
* 9 x 500 lb Mk 82 Snakeye bombs (4,500 lb total)
* 3 x 1,000 lb LDGP Mk 83 bombs (3,000 lb total)
* 1 x 2,000 lb LDGP Mk 84 bomb (2,000 lb total)
* 76 x FFAR Mighty Mouse rockets
* 4 x AGM-65B missiles
* 1 x 30 mm GAU-13/A cannon (353 rpg)
* 5 x BLU-1 incendiary bombs
* 1 x 2,000 lb LDGP Mk 84 Air bomb (2,000 lb total)
{{Navigation-End}}

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The F-20A can be viewed as both a sidegrade between F-16A and F-16A ADF and a downgrade in US tech tree as it can carry similar armaments to both of them but not to same capacity as either of them. While it can carry almost same payload type as F-16A (excluding GBU-8) it can only carry it in lower numbers which severely limits air-to-ground performance, but unlike F-16A or F-16A ADF it can carry both radar guided missiles and TV-guided AGM to a certain extent.

Best way to take down other planes is to use speed and surprise occupied enemy planes with either the Sparrow (only at altitudes several hundred meters above ground) or Sidewinders but with IR missiles be careful that friendly plane in question isn't the F-14, Su-27 or MiG-29 which have fairly high engine temperature and could result in friendly fire instead.

'''Dogfighting'''

While F-20A has amazing flight performance and thrust-to-weight ratio that allows the plane to dogfight inexperienced F-16 and F-14 players, trying to fight more experienced players can end fairly badly for F-20A as the M39A3 is far weaker than 20 mm Vulcan or 30 mm GSh-30-1 cannon and not bleeding enough speed while turning can easily get you ahead of plane you are chasing (and in front of their far powerful guns).

Head-ons are not recommended as the M39A3 is one of the weaker gun in the BR bracket and mounting 30 mm GAU-13/A cannon would only greatly decrease F-20A flight performance to add only 353 30 mm shells.

'''Air-to-air missile gameplay'''

F-20A has very limited gameplay in that aspect as it can carry only 6 AIM-9L or exchange 2 Sidewinders for 1 AIM-7F up to combination of 2 Sidewinders and 2 Sparrows. Sadly the F-20A does not have access to AIM-7M unlike F-16A ADF or F-14B which have far lower reaction time after being detached from the plane.

As the plane can gain energy faster than any plane on same BR, it's advised to surprise enemy with AIM-9L or target higher altitude targets with AIM-7F, while keeping safe distance from possible IR threats and staying at low altitude as the enemy planes usually have stronger radar guided missiles.

As the plane has access only to 45 countermeasures, it may not be preferential to split the amount between flares and chaffs as the radars encountered at this BR are usually pulse-doppler, where chaffs have minimal effect and low-alt flights and notching can work instead. Instead, bring flares as the number of tough IR missiles like R-73, AIM-9M, and similar missiles mean the F-20A need all it can bring to ward off these smart IR missiles.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Incredible overall flight performance with very good thrust-to-weight ratio with great energy retention
* Can stay at supersonic speed without using afterburner
* Combat flaps are capable of withstanding plane top speed
* Very small target compared to all planes it the BR bracket
* Combination of high manoeuvrability and even mediocre missile payload can surprise most enemies resulting in fairly easy shoot-downs.

'''Cons:'''

* Loses 2 hardpoints for AIM-9L for every AIM-7F
* M39A3 cannons deal very low damage
* Overall one of the worst air-to-air armaments when compared to planes on same BR
* Can carry only 45 countermeasures
* While it can maintain very low speed and not stalling, it does not have as good low-speed manoeuvrability as other planes

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

=== [[wt:en/news/8770-shop-development-pre-order-f-20a-tigershark-en|Devblog]] ===
Engineers from Northrop Corporation developed the F-20A Tigershark as a deep modernization of the F-5G fighter with improved flight and characteristics at a low cost. This new aircraft received a new power plant consisting of a single General Electric F404-100 engine, advanced avionics and radar, plus an expanded range of weapons. It made its first flight in 1982, where a total of 3 were built for testing. At the time of its creation, the F-20A was a direct competitor to the F-16 fighter jet, but was inferior to it and did not go into mass production. The only surviving F-20A was transferred to the California Science Center and is currently on display as an exhibit.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=f_20a Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[F-5 (Family)]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/8770-shop-development-pre-order-f-20a-tigershark-en|[Devblog] Pre-order: F-20A Tigershark]]

{{AirManufacturer Northrop}}
{{USA jet aircraft}}
{{USA premium aircraft}}