{{About
| about = American twin-engine fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = P-51 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=f-82e
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|cockpit=cockpit_f-82e.jpg
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American twin-engine fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.39]].

The most distinctive feature about the F-82E "Twin Mustang" is that it literally is two P-51 Mustangs conjoined together into a single aircraft.
The F-82E excels as a high-altitude bomber-killer or bomber escort. The F-82E's main assets are its destructive firepower (with the gun pod) combined with massive ammo count, its good climbing speed and its amazing escape speed.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,126 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 713 || 696 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 28.3 || 28.7 || 15.3 || 15.3 || rowspan="2" | 450
|-
! Upgraded
| 770 || 742 || 25.8 || 27.0 || 26.4 || 18.7
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 854 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 650 || 520 || 265 || ~11 || ~11
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 500 || < 700 || < 700 || > 450
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

The Twin Mustang has nearly two of everything: two fuselages, two engines, two tails, and two pilots. The last of which makes the Twin Mustang more survivable than most other fighter aircraft as each can work independently if the other is incapacitated.

Built with the intended purpose as a long-range escort for [[B-29A-BN|B-29 Superfortress]] heavy bombers, the fuel capacity in the Twin Mustang is much higher than its contemporaries. This means you will almost never run out of fuel, but you may also burn longer if the fuel tanks are ignited by enemy fire.

- 38 mm Bulletproof glass - Windshield
- 6.35 mm Steel - Fore cockpit armour plate, pilot and co-pilot
- 8 mm Steel - Armour plate, pilot and co-pilot's seats
- 11 mm Steel - Armour plate headrests, pilot and co-pilot
- 19.05 mm Steel - Engine protective plate

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|M3 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 6 x 12.7 mm M3 Browning machine guns, centre-mounted (400 rpg = 2,400 total)

Unlike the preceding American aircraft, the Twin Mustang no longer features outer wing-mounted armament but instead are now centre-mounted between the fuselages, so gun convergence is not a huge issue. When using tracer bullets and shooting continuously, it is possible to adjust aim effectively from more than 1.5 km away. In head-ons, this means your opponent will usually be destroyed or crippled well before he gets his own target indicator. With bombers, it means one serious burst from 0.7-1.0 km will deliver a critical, and a full-second burst from less than 0.7 km should cut any bomber into several pieces.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}

<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|AN-M64A1 (500 lb)|AN-M65A1 (1,000 lb)|AN-M66A2 (2,000 lb)|HVAR|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

- Without load
- 2 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bombs (1,000 lb total)
- 2 x 1,000 lb AN-M65A1 bombs (2,000 lb total)
- 2 x 2,000 lb AN-M66A2 bombs (4,000 lb total)
- 10 x HVAR rockets
- 8 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, centre-mounted (gunpod) (400 rpg = 3,200 total)

While its respectable payload of bombs, machine guns, and rockets make it an effective ground attacker, it is very vulnerable in that role unless all the enemy's fighters have all been neutralized.

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

Start play by climbing above 5,000 m while always maintaining a speed above 290 km/h. If this brings you in range of enemy fighters before you have achieved a height advantage simply turn away and let them seek other targets. Once you have achieved 5,000 m altitude with airspeed above 300 km/h you are virtually invulnerable since you will always have the option of running away with or without diving. You can seek and destroy bombers. Any fighter foolish enough to go after you should be dealt with head-on starting from more than 1.2 km away to ensure time to adjust and kill with your machine guns. If this is not an option or if you are being engaged by a pair of fighters, or if your initial pass fails to kill, keep running. Very few planes have the ability to follow you and your frame is sturdy enough to withstand the occasional long-distance hit.

As a rule, never let your airspeed drop below 300 km/h; do not go near ground level if there is more than one enemy fighter in the vicinity unless your airspeed is above 500 km/h, and never engage in furballs.

When used as a heavy fighter, keep in mind the brutally low handling capability of the F-82. Always avoid "furballs" and stay above your opponents. The climb rate makes the F-82 a capable bomber-killer. As a bomber killer, the aiming problems that many pilots face against smaller, more agile fighters evaporate. It is recommended to utilize the 8 x M2 Gun pod, due to the extremely high damage output. However, more experienced players may do away with this option, as it does hamper the handling of the craft.

Due to its high speed, it is very dangerous when used in a boom and run strategy (energy retention and a very high top speed in level flight mean it can be literally untouchable for a lot of single-engine fighters). In this case, it's very important to watch one's speed and to throttle back in dives or it can lose its wings due to high speed. For achieving the maximum straight-line speed at sea level, one should have the engine mixture set to 72%.

Remember, do not attempt to engage smaller and nimbler fighters, as most of the times you will overshoot and completely miss due to the poor handling.

Always use the tracer bullets with your six or fourteen 12.7 mm machine guns. Not only are the tracers very effective incendiaries, but they also give you the ability to see exactly where you are shooting up to 2 km away. This is invaluable in destroying bombers from far enough away to avoid their tail gunners, and in achieving incredible accuracy in head-ons well before your enemy gets a target indicator on you.

Boom and Zoom is not an ideal strategy with the F-82. At about 650 km/h you will experience extreme control stiffening. The F-82 excels in the destruction of bombers and other aircraft in head-ons.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Combined || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Variety of payload options
- Good fast-firing armament (M3 Browning MGs) with a high ammo capacity
- Above average climb rate
- Fast once upgraded (can outrun pretty much every fighter in level flight)
- Excellent in head-ons (which should rather be avoided due to large profile of F-82)
- M20 API-T ammunition option
- When equipped with a gun pod the F-82 is a flying flamethrower
- Brutal acceleration in dive
- Centre-mounted armament both primary and gun pod, allowing for devastating accuracy
- Pilot and co-pilot seated offset from the centre of the aircraft, making them harder to reliably hit, especially in a head-on engagement
- Sturdy airframe

'''Cons:'''

- Poor handling
- Difficult to aim (it gets a bit better with booster upgrade)
- Elevator prone to failure when damaged
- With the gun pod installed, the continuous fire will slow the plane down significantly
- Prone to control stiffening in a dive

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

Designed to provide the US forces with long-range escort capabilities over the Pacific, the F-82 bore the appearance of desperate measures taken to use surplus P-51 parts. In reality, the F-82 was purposely designed as such in order to provide a fighter plane that had fresh pilots ready to engage, despite the tedious nature of long distance flights. Each fuselage carried a pilot and a co-pilot/navigator which reduced individual fatigue over long missions.

The F-82 started development in 1944, with significant deliveries done in early 1946. Although too late for the war, the fighter still saw extensive use by Air Defense Command as an escort fighter and a night fighter. 14 F-82's were converted to winterized interceptors for use over Alaska. It also saw significant use in the Korean War with Japanese based (US planes deployed from Japan) F-82s among the first aircraft to operate over Korea. In fact, the first three North Korean aircraft shot down by US forces were done so by the Twin Mustang.

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=f-82e Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|INb9VjLxKf0|'''Most unusual aircraft''' discusses the {{PAGENAME}} at 1:26 - ''War Thunder Official Channel''|d5k2T9FP0bQ|'''Avoid them in frontal attack!''' discusses the {{PAGENAME}} at 0:38 - ''War Thunder Official Channel''}}

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

- [[Bf 109 Z]]
- [[SM.92]]

== External links ==

<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

- [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/226962-north-american-f-82e/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer NAA}}
{{USA twin-engine fighters}}
