{{About
|about=American strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
|usage=other versions
|link=F-84 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=f-84g
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
|cockpit=cockpit_f-84g.jpg
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.77 "Advancing Storm"]].

Republic Aircraft Company's jump into the jet fighter market was not as smooth as they would have liked. They experienced severe growing pains as they developed and produced the F-84 series aircraft, especially the B, C, D and E variants. Important upgrades and modifications included a more powerful turbine engine, strengthened wings, aerodynamically secure wing-tip fuel tanks and a strengthened structure. The resultant of these upgrades was the much improved F-84G fighter, which boasted new innovations such as improved avionics, radar, the capability of in-flight refuelling and ability to carry a Mark 7 nuclear bomb. Though the operationally longest lasting of the series with the United States (into the mid-1960s), several other nations continued to use it including France, Italy and Taiwan (Republic of China), however, Greece continued flying their fighters until 1991.<ref name="Burrows" />

Even with the changes from earlier models, even in-game pilots will notice the quirkiness of the F-84G. Noted for its nickname "Lead Sled", the F-84G, like the B version in-game has an extremely long takeoff roll, around 1,500 m, typically due to the heavier payloads afforded to this aircraft. Though, once at altitude and during attack runs, the F-84G is an incredibly stable platform and can be outfitted with a number of various suspended armaments along with its six 12.7 mm M3 Browning machine guns. Each gun only has 300 rounds of ammunition, therefore trigger control is necessary or else the pilot will be left with empty guns in short order.  Considered a multi-role aircraft, the F-84G can be utilised as a fighter-interceptor, bomber interceptor and ground attack fighter. The F-84G can be laden with a variety of bombs ranging from 100 lbs all the way up to two 1,000 lb bombs. [[HVAR]] and [[Tiny Tim]] rockets are a viable option alone or mixed with bombs to expand the options of targets to be attacked depending on the map the pilot is flying in.

Like many jet fighters, flying slowly makes for an easy target and this is no exception for the F-84G. Speed is necessary to ensure manoeuvrability both to engage a target and to shake a tail.  Though not the fastest fighter at this rank, the F-84G can hold its own and when pressed, the six centre lined M3 Browning machine guns can punch enough holes in an enemy fighter to bring it down. Don't expect this fighter when laden down with two 1,000 lbs bombs or two Tiny Tim and 24 HVAR rockets to excel in a dogfight as it won't with all that weight, however, after all that ordnance is released the F-84B can then mix it up, though it is preferable to maintain speed while performing Boom & Zoom manoeuvres.

While dealing with mixed reviews over its positive and negative aspects, the F-84 series aircraft paved the way for a later aircraft which magnified all of the positive qualities of the F-84, being a stable firing platform, loaded to the gills with assorted suspended armaments and a main gun which rained destruction on the enemy, this aircraft would later be known as the Fairchild-Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

The F-84G is a streamlined all-metal jet fighter which was designed to house the upgraded Allison J35-A-29 turbine jet engine. Though an upgraded engine compared to the F-84B, typically this fighter was laden with more ordnance thus still requiring a significant roll-out time of 1,500 m (~5,000 ft) before lift-off. Don't be dismayed as other fighters are taking to the sky while you are still building up speed as once in the air you can climb to bomber altitude or set up for a ground attack run that few others can rival.

Though the take-off and climb characteristics of the Allison jet engine appeared lacklustre, it actually had decent level flight speed and good dive characteristics. Speed is what saves this fighter, in once it has enough built up, it will perform. Though not the fastest at its battle rating, the F-84G is a great boom & zoom aircraft vs. being a dogfighter. Turning this aircraft will bleed its speed and the roll rate can be affected by the weight of the wing-tip fuel tanks. One negative aspect of the wing-tip fuel tanks of the early F-84s was that high speeds (+1,000 km/h) tended to cause the fuel tanks to twist resulting (mitigated by the addition of fins on the tanks) in the destruction of the wings which does reflect in realistic and simulator battles in-game if exceeded. While turning in this jet is not advised, Immelmann and Split-S manoeuvres will help to conserve energy without compromising the speed of the aircraft.

If ever in danger of risking going faster than maximum rip speed, it is important to throttle back and extend air-brakes to reduce speed enough to keep the aircraft intact and manoeuvre in for the kill.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 0 m - sea level)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 976 || 971 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 29.0 || 30.4 || 30.8 || 29.3 || rowspan="2" | 3,000
|-
! Upgraded
| 993 || 985 || 27.2 || 28.0 || 42.1 || 36.2
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 527 || 499 || 350 || ~11 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 530 || < 600 || < 690 || N/A
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="4" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="2" | Empty mass || colspan="2" | Wing loading (full fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | Allison J35-A-29 ||  1
| colspan="2" | 5,450 kg || colspan="2" | 276 kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="3" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load) || rowspan="2" | Max Takeoff<br />Weight
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! 8m fuel || 20m fuel || 27m fuel
|-
| 1,050 kg || colspan="2" | Axial-flow turbojet
| 5,868 kg || 6,447 kg || 6,685 kg || 9,979 kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB / SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="4" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (100%)
|-
! Condition || 100% || WEP
! 8m fuel || 20m fuel || 27m fuel || MTOW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || 2,300 kgf || N/A
| 0.39 || 0.36 || 0.34 || 0.23
|-
| ''Optimal'' || 2,300 kgf<br />(0 km/h) || N/A
| 0.39 || 0.36 || 0.34 || 0.23
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 38 mm Bulletproof glass in cockpit front.
* 6.35 mm Steel plate in front of pilot.
* 12.7 mm Steel plate in pilot's headrest.
* 8 mm Steel plate behind the pilot.

Like many early jet fighters, the armour was placed around the pilot while not much thought was given to the other critical components of the aircraft mostly due to the weight imposed on the early and weak turbojet engines placed into service. From behind, the pilot is protected by an 8 mm steel plate behind the seat with a 12.7 mm steel plate as a headrest. In front of the pilot, a 38 mm bulletproof windscreen adds protection from head-on's or from defensive bomber weapons. Another 6.35 mm steel plate is placed in front of the pilot and instrument panel for further protection of bullets entering the open-ended air-intake.

Other critical components such as the jet turbine, fuel tanks and coolers are all exposed, only protected by the outer skin of the aircraft which may deflect incoming bullets if at sufficient distance or angle to do so.

When attacking an F-84G, aim for the centre of the aircraft where you have a good chance of getting a critical hit on the engine or in a fuel tank. Due to this aircraft having wing-tip fuel tanks, shots to the wings or wing-tip tanks have a potential of starting a fire or breaking a wing off. If the attacking aircraft has sufficient calibre ammunition then shots taken at the pilot may have a larger chance of success if made from the sides or behind. This aircraft does not have much protection against rockets or missiles, however, given sufficient notice, rockets can be avoided and it is possible that missiles can be outmanoeuvred, however, when playing in realistic or simulator you run the risk of the pilot blacking-out due to G-force manoeuvres or wings snapping while trying to outfly a missile.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M3 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 4 x 12.7 mm M3 Browning machine gun, nose-mounted (300 rpg = 1,200 total)
* 2 x 12.7 mm M3 Browning machine gun, wing-mounted (300 rpg = 600 total)

Early fighters had many different configurations of machine guns and cannons mounted in the fuselage and in the wings, sometimes needing to be synced with the propeller to prevent its destruction. With the jet age developing, many factors of the past needed to be reconsidered with gun placement. With jet fighters flying faster and chasing faster targets, trying to find the sweet spot with gun convergence was extremely difficult, jet fighter pilots needed a little extra help with this. Besides implementing newer gun sights and early radar, jet fighter guns tended to be fuselage-mounted, thus eliminating the need to set the convergence and at any point between 0 and 800 m the ammunition rounds would fly true without a convergence point.

For the F-84G, four of the 12.7 mm M3 Browning machine guns were mounted in the fuselage with the other two mounted in the wing roots. While they were not all centre mounted, the two in the wing roots were close enough that convergence did not need to be messed with. Two ammunition options provide the most bang-for-the-buck, firstly, the omni-purpose rounds are good all-around ammunition rounds which provide tracers and explosive/incendiary rounds which are effective against aircraft and up to light armoured vehicles. Hardened vehicles and bunkers should be left to bombs and rockets for their destruction. If as a pilot you are looking for the sneak attack, stealth rounds will allow you to get on target fire off rounds and not give away your position, giving you a few seconds to make a second attack if needed before the target realizes where you are coming from.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|AN-M30A1 (100 lb)|AN-M57 (250 lb)|AN-M64A1 (500 lb)|AN-M65A1 (1,000 lb)}}
{{main|HVAR|Tiny Tim}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 2 x 100 lb AN-M30A1 bombs (200 lb total)
* 2 x 250 lb AN-M57 bombs (500 lb total)
* 2 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bombs (1,000 lb total)
* 2 x 1,000 lb AN-M65A1 bombs (2,000 lb total)
* 24 x HVAR rockets
* 32 x HVAR rockets
* 24 x HVAR rockets + 2 x 100 lb AN-M30A1 bombs (200 lb total)
* 24 x HVAR rockets + 2 x 250 lb AN-M57 bombs (500 lb total)
* 24 x HVAR rockets + 2 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bombs (1,000 lb total)
* 24 x HVAR rockets + 2 x 1,000 lb AN-M65A1 bombs (2,000 lb total)
* 24 x HVAR rockets + 2 x Tiny Tim rockets

The F-84G is one of a small handful of aircraft in War Thunder which offers many different suspended armament options ranging from bombs and rockets depending on the target needing to be destroyed. Due to the more effective engine utilised in the F-84G, it could sport a larger number of suspended armaments compared to its older brother the [[F-84B-26|F-84B]], turning into a truly ground attack workhorse. In comparison, a fully-loaded single-seat {{PAGENAME}} had approximately the same loadout capability as an early 7 crew [[B-25J-1|B-25J]] bomber. The smaller bombs such as the AN-M30A1 and AN-M57 and HVAR rockets are useful against soft targets like anti-aircraft batteries, unarmoured vehicles, ships and some light tanks. The heavier hitters like the AN-M61A1, AN-M65A1 and Tiny Tim rockets are effective (more like overkill) for the softer targets, but also work well with bunkers, heavier armoured tanks, larger ships and can also be utilised against bases.

Sometimes the suspended weapons you start out with doesn't work well later on in the match, therefore you can return to your base and exit the aircraft (default key = "J") and select a different load-out unless you would like to fly strictly as a fighter where you can select "without load" and rely just on the six Browning M3 machine guns. The wide variety of ordnance options available for this aircraft make it an excellent clean-up ground attacker which can attack just about anything on the map with the right setup.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The F-84G is a versatile multi-role fighter and can be configured to be used in various types of aerial warfare, namely bomber interceptor, ground attack and fighter-interceptor.

;Bomber Interceptor

Thanks to an upgraded engine compared to the F-84B, the G model has a bit more climbing power and does not need to rely solely on side climbing and reach the necessary altitude to begin hunting bombers or diving onto hapless fighters.  As a bomber interceptor, the pilot has two options for weapon load-outs besides the default guns, noting the HVAR and Tiny Tim rockets.

If the F-84G is still stock or in the process of upgrading modules, the best bet will be to not load any suspended armaments and rely on the six 12.7 mm M3 Browning machine guns to do the work. Just using the machine guns will help save on weight and make it a bit easier to climb on the unmodified engine. For those pilots who have modified engines, they can opt for guns only for a quicker climb or attach HVAR rockets for an additional punch against larger bombers.

Once at altitude, scan and select a bomber target of opportunity. It is best to attain higher altitude than the bomber, giving you options as to which direction to attack from and increase your speed when diving in, speed is key to avoid defensive guns, race out of their range and to gain enough distance to safely turn around and follow up with another attack if needed.

Since the six M3 machine guns are virtually centered on the aircraft, the inbound bullets will be clustered and should be aimed at engines, cockpit, fuel tanks and any other critical areas as the body of the aircraft can sometimes absorb a large amount of smaller calibre ammunition before causing a critical hit or crippling the aircraft. The limitation of only 300 rounds per gun will require trigger discipline by the pilot to ensure enough rounds are available for a secondary or tertiary attack without having to reload or return to base.

Utilizing HVAR rockets at large lumbering bombers can have a great impact, though unguided, they will need to be pointed in the general direction when launched, it may take several practice runs to determine best angle and distance in which to fire from for a successful attack. As with any unguided rocket, the best bet is to launch a volley of rockets to ensure a greater chance of at least one hitting.

;Ground Attack

Jet fighters tend to not make good ground attackers as it typically requires them to fly low and slow making them easy pickings for enemy fighters above or anti-aircraft fire below. Since the F-84G is neither an exceptionally fast fighter nor a lumbering bomber, it has an advantage of being fast enough to be dangerous to ground targets without being a sitting duck for patrolling enemy fighters. Compared to many other fighters which are capable of ground attack, the F-84G can carry a fantastic amount of ground attack ordnance which can seriously put a dent into the enemy teams vehicles, bunkers and bases.

While many aircraft available in War Thunder has a specific role of fighter-interceptor, ground attack or bomber, the F-84G can set itself up with suspended ordnance depending on the targets available on the map. The F-84G has several options depending on the modules unlocked by the pilot which range from outfitting HVAR unguided rockets, massive Tiny Tim unguided rockets, 100 lb, 250 lb, 500 lb and 1,000 lb bombs or a mixture of bombs and rockets.

Smaller bombs and the HVAR rockets are best for going after lightly-armoured targets such as aircraft (on the ground or with rockets in the air), anti-aircraft batteries, trucks, some light tanks and ships. The larger Tiny Tim rockets and bombs are best reserved for more hardened targets like pillboxes, medium and large tanks, bunkers, large ships and bases. This fighter is not afraid to get down and dirty taking out ground targets, just be aware of your surroundings and watch for enemy fighters or anti-aircraft guns poised to take you out.

;Fighter Interceptor

The F-84G is one of the fastest aircraft at its BR and it is more than capable of fighting early jets, preferably using [[Boom & Zoom|Boom and Zoom]] or [[Boom & Run|Boom and Run]] tactics. After spawning, reach a speed of at least 650 km/h or about 400 mph (this part shouldn't be very hard since the F-84G gets an airspawn on most maps) then climb at an angle of 10 degrees. After reaching your wanted altitude procede to dive down on unsuspecting enemies and disintegrate them using your centreline [[M3 Browning (12.7 mm)|M3 .50 cals]]. After making a pass do not turn after your opponents but keep your energy up and increase your distance, then repeat the process.

The F-84G has a minimum fuel load of 7 minutes which means that you will have to be aware of your fuel or take a bigger fuel load and accept the performance drop that comes with it. Another problem the F-84G has is the ammo count. It has 300 rounds per gun and because of the M3 machine guns' high rate of fire the ammo can be depleted entirely in just 15 seconds. This may sound a lot to some players but the [[M3 Browning (12.7 mm)|M3]] are machine guns and not cannons so you will need to hit more rounds than usual and in turn waste more rounds. Nonetheless the F-84G still has enough ammo to reliably take down 3-4 aircraft before having to rearm in the airfield.

The F-84G is fast and very capable at the hands of an experienced player, it is not very different from its predecessor the [[F-84B-26|F-84B]] and although often mistaken for being easy prey for its bad manoeuvrability it is quite the opposite.

===Radars===
<!--{{main|AN/APG-30}}-->
The F-84G is equipped with an AN/APG-30 rangefinding radar, located in the nose of the aircraft.
It will automatically detect other planes within the scanning area and display the range to the closest target. It is linked with a gyro gunsight and can help with aiming at close range.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
! colspan="4" | AN/APG-30 - Rangefinding radar
|-
! {{Annotation|Maximum<br/>Tracking<br/>Range|The maximum range at which a target can be tracked}}
! {{Annotation|Minimum<br/>Tracking<br/>Range|The range below which targets cannot be tracked by the radar}}
! {{Annotation|Azimuth Tracking<br/>Angle|How far to each side the radar can track a target}}
! {{Annotation|Elevation Tracking<br/>Angle|How far up and down the radar can track a target}}
|-
| 2,750 m || 300 m || ±9° || ±9°
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Centreline armament of six .50 cal machine guns with a great rate of fire
* A variety of large payload options, a fantastic ground attacker
* High top speed 
* Good acceleration
* Excellent dive speed
* Usually gets a low airspawn that gives it a speed advantage at the start of the match
* Sturdy wings, nearly unrippable

'''Cons:'''

* Turn rate is below average, though better than the F-84B
* Manoeuvrability diminished with heavy payloads
* Long takeoff run
* Big performance drop at higher altitudes

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

In early 1944, Alexander Kartveli, the chief designer for the Republic Aviation Aircraft Company set out to work on a replacement for the piston-powered P-47 Thunderbolt which instead would be powered by a turbojet. All attempts at trying to use the P-47 frame to accommodate a turbojet failed and Kartveli resorted to designing a brand new aircraft around an axial compressor turbojet engine.<ref name="Burrows" /> Due to the nature of the engine taking up a large majority of the fuselage, fuel tanks were designed to be in the wings of the aircraft, however, the body was streamlined to make the smallest profile possible and retain all necessary critical components.

The USAAF in September 1944 released new requirements for a daytime fighter along with specific characteristics such as the top speed of 600 mph (966 km/h), armament of six 12.7 mm machine guns or four 15.2 mm machine guns along with housing a General Electric TG-180 axial turbojet also known as the Allison J35 series turbojet engine.<ref name="Burrows" /> Republic proposed their new aircraft and on paper proposed it would be superior to Lockheed's P-80 Shooting Star. The USAAF noting Republic's already proven experience with single-seat fighters proposed a contract without holding any competition. These initial order fighters were listed as YP-84As and P-84Bs.

These early test aircraft were put to wind tunnel testing and it was found that major flaws developed when subjected to high speeds, notably longitudinal instability in the aircraft's frame and stabilizer skin buckling at high speeds. Also noted was issues with the weight of the aircraft and the problem with early turbojets not producing enough thrust for takeoff and climb outs (a problem which plagued the F-84B aircraft until more robust engines were outfitted). Early J35-GE-7 engines were replaced with J35-A-15 versions which helped with the thrust ratio, however wing-tip fuel tanks were added to the mix prior to proper testing and issues developed which at one point grounded the fleet of aircraft until modifications were made.

In 1947, the USAF changed the pursuit designation of the aircraft to fighter and thus the P-84 became the F-84. The YP-84A and the F-84B only differed when it came to the type of M3 machine guns they carried, as the F-84B had faster-firing machine guns than the YP-84A. Early successes of the F-84B were overshadowed by problem after problem including a speed restriction limiting flight to no more than Mach 0.8 as any faster and the aircraft experienced control reversal where the pilot would input normal commands with the control stick and the opposite manoeuvre would occur (for instance if the pilot pulled back on the control stick to make the aircraft climb, the aircraft would actually begin to dive and vice versa). Even with the speed restrictions, the entire fleet of F-84B fighters was grounded by 1948 due to parts shortages and structural failures.<ref name="Burrows" /> It was also at this time that the F-84C aircraft were also determined to be incapable of performing any of their mission parameters, however since the F-84D was already under production (with all of the B and C variants issues being resolved), the program continued. Funding was allocated to upgrade the B and C variants, however, both were finally withdrawn from active duty service by the end of 1952.

Testing of the F-84D determined that the wings needed to be covered with a thicker aluminium skin to strengthen them which was helpful because the engine was upgraded to the more powerful J35-A-17D. Here it was found that during high-G manoeuvres, the wingtip fuel tanks led to the structural failure of the wings due to twisting motions. A simple fix of adding a small triangular fin to the external portion of the fuel tank alleviated that problem. Despite the fixes introduced with the D variant, it too was withdrawn from active duty in 1952.
The F-84E variant fighter saw modifications specifically with strengthened wings and a larger cockpit which was necessary to equip advanced avionics to include an A-1C gunsight which worked with an APG-30 radar.<ref name="Burrows" /> Folding rocket racks were also developed so that once the HVAR rockets were fired; the racks would fold flush with the wing increasing the aircraft's overall aerodynamics. Unfortunately even with all of the modifications, failure of the aircraft hinged upon the Allison J35-A-17 engines which were only designed to be flown for 25 hours a month and would receive a complete overhaul after 100 hours of flight. Due to the number of sorties flown in the Korean War, engine overhauls were taking place more frequently and quickly exhausted all of the spare parts and new engines produced.

The final variant of F-84 introduced was the G variant which began service in 1951. Utilised for the next nine years, the F-84G had new innovations which became standard on future aircraft to include, a refuelling boom mounted on the left-wing for in-flight refuelling, instrument landing system to allow for landing during inclement weather, a J35-A-29 engine, an autopilot system and the first fighter with the ability to carry a single Mark 7 nuclear bomb. The F-84G was retired from US service in 1960, however, countries such as Portugal continued to use this fighter through 1974 and were flown out of Angola.

The F-84 had a rocky start into the foray of turbine jet fighters, however, challenges and difficulties paved the way for the [[F-100D|F-100]] Super Sabre and the RF-101 Voodoo as their replacements.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=f-84g Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Other versions

* [[F-84B-26]] ''Thunderjet''
* [[F-84G-21-RE (China)]]
* [[F-84G-21-RE (Italy)]]
* [[F-84G-26-RE (France)]]

;Contemporary aircraft

* de Havilland [[Venom_FB.4|Venom]]
* Gloster [[Meteor (Family)|Meteor]]
* Dassault [[M.D.450B_Ouragan|M.D.450B Ouragan]]
* Grumman [[F9F-2|F9F]] Panther (USAF)
* Grumman [[F9F-8|F9F]] Cougar (US Navy)

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/364979-republic-f-84g-thunderjet/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

=== References ===
<references>
<ref name="Burrows">Burrows, W. E. (2013, August). It had the body of a fighter and a bomber's soul. Retrieved from https://www.airspacemag.com/military-aviation/thunderjet-307269/</ref>
</references>

{{AirManufacturer Republic}}
{{USA jet aircraft}}