{{Specs-Card
|code=f1m2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''F1M''', designated as '''Type 0 Observation Plane ({{Annotation|零式水上観測機|Rei Shiki Suijō Kansokuki}})''', replaced the [[E8N2]] and served as a scout for battleships. It also performed various other tasks, such as escorting convoys, bombing targets, maritime patrol, rescue, transport, and anti-shipping strike.

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27. Although it is classified as a bomber, it only carries 2 x 60 kg bombs and has a high-altitude bomber spawn, which limits its effectiveness in that role. The best approach is to spawn at the airfield and compete with fellow biplanes as a fighter, a role the F1M2 performs better at, surprising unsuspecting enemies with its versatility.

;Nicknames:
* Allied reporting name: Pete

'''Ships that carry the {{PAGENAME}} as a ship-launched reconnaissance aircraft:'''
* {{Specs-Link|jp_cruiser_myoko}}

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 397 || 388 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 17.8 || 18.4 || 11.0 || 11.0 || rowspan="2" | 300
|-
! Upgraded
| 426 || 412 || 16.3 || 17.0 || 16.9 || 13.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 356 || 337 || 240 || ~10 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 280 || < 320 || < 320 || > 313
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

The F1M2 lacks protective armour, however, its fuel tanks are self-sealing. There is one below the pilot and three behind the engine which are arranged side by side. The gunner subsequently is also not protected by any armour and can be hit easily.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Type 97 navy (7.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 7.7 mm Type 97 navy machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 2 x 60 kg Navy Type 97 Number 6 bombs (120 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Type 92 (7.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, dorsal turret (582 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The F1M2 is quite an interesting little biplane, and has several perks that allow it to fulfil a multitude of roles. It has surprisingly good manoeuvrability, decent armament, as well as the ability to land on water due to its floatplane design. All in all, it is a fun aircraft to fly in both air and naval battles.

'''Air battles''':

The F1M2 would seem to be a relatively bad fighter, given that it has massive floats. However, the opposite is actually true. The F1M2 is very capable as a fighter, and has very impressive manoeuvrability for an aircraft of its type. However, be aware that the large, heavy floats result in a worse turning circle than most dedicated biplane fighters such as the [[I-15 (Family)|I-15]], [[He 51 (Family)|He-51]] or [[Fury Mk I|Fury]]. Though the F1M2 is still an able turner and can keep up with some fighters such as the [[P-26 (Family)|P-26]], pursuing a direct fighter engagement is not advised as it is generally a bit worse than dedicated fighter aircraft. As well, the F1M2 is rather slow, so don't expect it to outrun anything (other than extremely slow aircraft like the [[Po-2]] or [[Swordfish Mk I|Swordfish]], of course).

The F1M2 is equipped with two 7.7 mm Type 97 machine guns which are quite adequate for tearing biplanes apart. However, these guns are relatively bad for everything else, and won't do much damage to aircraft built out of metal. Of course, most aircraft at its BR are wooden biplanes, so the weapon is quite adequate. As well, the F1M2 can carry two 60 kg bombs, which are more than enough to destroy any lightly-armoured targets. Finally, the F1M2 has an ace up its sleeve - the 7.7 mm defensive gun. This weapon is mounted on a flexible mounting at the rear, and is a potent anti-aircraft weapon. In general, due to its lack of powerful guns or suspended ordnance, the F1M2 should be played more as a "heavy" fighter, utilizing its great manoeuvrability, airspawn, and defensive armament.

'''Naval battles''':

Naval battles are the area where the F1M2 shines. Due to its floatplane design, it can easily cap bases by landing on them. When flying in this capacity, beware of any PT boats in the nearby area, and never land when there are enemy vessels close by. Though most ships at its BR have little to no heavy armament, they are still very capable of shredding a plane sitting on the water - a literal sitting duck. As well, the F1M2 can use its 7.7 mm machine guns and bombs against enemy torpedo boats, but this is generally rather ineffective. The 7.7 mm MGs are rather bad at doing heavy damage against PT boats, and the 60 kg bombs have to be dropped at extremely low altitudes in Naval RB to have good accuracy. Thus, in naval battles, it's best to play the F1M2 as an aircraft to quickly capture points.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Receives bomber spawn, allowing for strategic positioning and potential early attacks
* Capable of landing on water, expanding its operational capabilities
* Can land and take off from the ground; spawning mid-air after repairs
* Exhibits impressive performance as a fighter, often surpassing other biplanes in combat
* Can continue flying even if floats are damaged or destroyed
* The center float serves as protection against attacks from below
* Equipped with [[Type 97 navy (7.7 mm)|Type 97s]], which are arguably the best Japanese 7.7 mm
* Demonstrates noteworthy speed compared to aircraft it usually will face, offering a competitive advantage
* Features takeoff, combat, and landing flaps, a rare characteristic among biplanes
* Incorporates self-sealing fuel tanks, distinguishing it from other Japanese aircraft

'''Cons:'''

* Lacks armor protection, leaving the aircraft vulnerable to even weak enemy fire
* Exhibits slower turning capabilities compared to other biplanes
* Vulnerable to I-15s and I-16s, which possess superior armament
* Payload options are generally ineffective or lacking in utility

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Mitsubishi F1M2 Type 0 (Rei Kan/Zero Kan) Observation Seaplane Model 11 (Allied reporting name: Pete)

A single-engine all-metal biplane with a main central float and two additional underwing floats. It was originally built as a catapult-launched reconnaissance floatplane specializing in gunnery spotting for battleships and heavy cruisers of the Imperial Japanese Navy.

Flight tests of the first prototype Ka-17 (F1M1) aircraft (with a Nakajima Hikari 1 engine) were performed in June 1936. The tests showed that the seaplane had multiple issues, mostly having to do with poor directional stability. In addition, the F1M1's seaworthiness was doubtful.

Two years were spent performing a serious redesign. A new central float was built for the F1M, replacing the Nakajima E8N1 hydroplane float used on the prototypes. The Nakajima Hikari engine was replaced with a more powerful Mitsubishi Zuisei 13 fourteen-cylinder double-row air-cooled engine (the same as that used for Zero fighters) with a maximum take-off power of 875 hp.

An improved version of the hydroplane, designated as the Type 0 Observation Seaplane Model 11 (F1M2), began full-scale production in 1940.

The F1M2 was armed with two 7.7 mm Type 97 Model 3a synchronized fuselage-mounted machine guns with 500 rounds each, and one more 7.7 mm Type 97 (Lewis Mk.III) machine gun with 582 rounds (6 standard magazines) was mounted in the turret in the observer's cockpit to protect the rear of the plane from attacks from above. The lower wing panels had lugs installed to suspend two 60 kg, two 30 kg, or six 20 kg bombs.

At the beginning of the Pacific War, the F1M2s took part in the Battles for the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands. The seaplanes were launched from floating bases and later from battleships, cruisers, and coastlines. The Rei Kans were used as scouts, gunnery spotters, light bombers, and anti-submarine aircraft. In June 1942, they were used as dive bombers over the Aleutian Islands; they also covered the Japanese positions there from the air as sea fighters.

A total of 1,118 F1M2s were manufactured, and their production was discontinued in March 1944. The aircraft remained in service until the end of the war.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=f1m2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of a similar configuration or era

* [[OS2U-1]]
* [[OS2U-3]]
* [[Po-2M]]
* [[S17BS]]

;Aircraft of a similar role
* [[Shipboard reconnaissance aircraft]]

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Mitsubishi}}
{{Japan bombers}}
{{Ship-launched reconnaissance aircraft}}