{{About
| about = premium gift German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Fw 190 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=fw-190c
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|market=Fw 190 C (Germany)
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium gift rank {{Specs|rank}} German fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update 1.85 "Supersonic"]] as a reward for the [[wt:en/news/5962-special-festive-quest-en|2018 Festive Quest]] for ten Christmas toys for pilots earned during the event. This variant receives a high altitude supercharger meaning it will exceed in performance at higher altitudes, this is complimented by its decent climb rate. But this plane sacrifices 2 wing mounted cannons for enhanced flight capability.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
This aircraft has a very unique playstyle in regards to the other 190s.It can turn reasonably well at most speeds, having turning capabilities akin to that of the 1st 190 in the tech tree, albeit at a major cost in energy. This fighter has a mediocre climb rate, around 15.6 m/s (RB/SB) which is below average for the BR range it sits in. The most unique feature this aircraft possesses is its supercharger allowing it to perform at altitudes well above 7 km.

This 190 has a fairly slow top speed at sea level, so you won't see it running away from most planes but at high altitudes, it is reasonable fast.

Like any other 190, the roll rate is exceptional allowing for good firing solutions during dives and good defensive flying capabilities. As mentioned before, the turning capability of the 190 is fairly decent and not something to glance over. Although, it can't function as a dedicated turn fighter, it can perform very well in dogfights. In addition, the 190 has a very low stall speed which is a good asset to have in vertical dogfights. Another point to mention is that this 190 has an off-centre off mass (possibly due to the intake at the bottom of the plane) which is very noticeable during low speed manoeuvres.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 11,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 663 || 646 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 21.1 || 21.9 || 12.3 || 12.3 || rowspan="2" | 450
|-
! Upgraded
| 709 || 685 || 19.0 || 20.0 || 19.6 || 15.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 700 || 310 || ~12 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 300 || < 550 || > 320
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->
This plane is not suited for close quarters dogfighting, but despite its low mass excels at energy fighting. It will not last long in a turnfight. The front armoured glass plate of the cockpit is 57 mm thick, and the pilot is protected from the rear by 2 plates, 8 mm and 12 mm thick respectively. The engine is prone to damage in head-ons due to the lack of armour protection around the engine cowling.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, wing-mounted (250 rpg = 500 total)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (900 rpg = 1,800 total)

The Fw 190 C receives 2 MG 151 20 mm cannons mounted in the inner wings behind the propeller, and 2 MG 17 7.92 mm machine guns mounted in the nose, the standard for German aircraft at this point in the tree. The 20 mm cannons get 500 rounds of ammo with their respective belts making them considerably deadly and optimal for longer battles. The MG 17s get 1,800 rounds of ammo but do lesser amounts of damage, best used in combination with the 20 mm cannons, but can be used to effectively peck damage lighter aircraft.

== Usage in battles ==
''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Great armament with good amount of ammunition
* Supercharger gives great acceleration and performance at high altitudes
* Control surfaces very responsive at extreme speeds

'''Cons:'''

* Cannot sustain prolonged turn fights
* Not heavily armoured
* Climb rate can be exceeded by some opponents
* Very poor control response during near stall manoeuvres

== History ==
<!-- Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History) and add a link to it here using the main template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <ref></ref>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <references />. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under === In-game description ===, also if applicable). -->
The Fw 190 C is an experimental high-altitude fighter powered by the DB-603 engine, developed from the same project that yielded the highly-effective [[Fw 190 D-12|Fw 190 D]] series aircraft. Designed to be a high-altitude interceptor, the Fw 190 C was designed with a unique power plant consisting of the DB 603 engine mated to an underslung turbocharger. While moderately successful, the Fw 190 C was never ordered into production, being superseded by the Fw 190 D and Ta 152 programs.

Following the success of the Fw 190 A series, Focke-Wulf pursued the development of several variants which would be capable of high-altitude flight, as the Fw 190 A’s radial engines suffered at higher altitudes. The first such design was the Fw 190 B series, which were essentially converted Fw 190 As with a pressurized cockpit and engine boosting. However, Focke-Wulf soon pursued the development of new inline-engined variants of the Fw 190 A, using the Daimler-Benz DB 603 and the Junkers Jumo 213 powerplants. The Junkers-powered Fw 190s would later be spun off into the highly-successful Fw 190 D series, while the DB 603 engine was given to the experimental Fw 190 C.

The Fw 190 C featured a DB 603 inline engine mounted in an extended engine cowling; despite this, the Fw 190s retained the cowling of the Fw 190 A. The aircraft featured a huge underslung Hirth TK 11 supercharger designed to boost engine performance at higher altitudes. The aircraft first flew in this configuration in December of 1942. In the same month, the German Air Ministry (or RLM) ordered 727 Fw 190 Cs; however, this order was soon cancelled in favour of the more-successful Fw 190 D and Ta 152. As a result, the Fw 190 C would never enter serial production and remained a prototype aircraft project.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=fw-190c Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/5965-development-fw-190-c-premium-fighter-en|[Devblog] Fw 190 C Premium fighter]]
* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/439686-fw-190-c1/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Focke-Wulf}}
{{Germany fighters}}
{{Germany premium aircraft}}
{{Winter Event}}