{{About
| about = German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Fw 190 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=fw-190a-5
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_Fw_190_A-5_U12.jpg|ArtImage Fw 190 A-5-U12.png}}
|card_name=Fw 190 A-5/U12
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was a variant of the Focke-Wulf Fw 190, a German single-seat, single-engine fighter aircraft that was widely used during World War II. The Fw 190 A-5 was developed in 1942 to shift the plane's center of gravity and increase the payload capacity of the Fw 190 by moving the engine forward and allowing more weight to be carried aft.  In the course of the war, the Fw 190 A-5 was used by the Luftwaffe as a ground-attack aircraft, night fighter, fighter-bomber, and fighter in several locations, such as France, the Soviet Union, North Africa, and Britain. The Fw 190 A-5 proved to be superior to the Spitfire Mk. V at low and medium altitudes but suffered from decreased performance at high altitudes. The Fw 190 A-5 was also loaned to Japan for evaluation but was not adopted by the Japanese Army. Nonetheless, the aircraft was notable for its versatility and effectiveness, as well as its use by some of the most accomplished Luftwaffe aces during WWII. The "U-12" stands for "Umrüst-Bausatz 12", which means "conversion kit 12" in German. This was a designation for a series of field modifications that were applied to some Fw 190 A-5s to enhance their capabilities for specific missions. Specifically, the Fw 190 A-5/U12 was equipped with two underwing 20 mm MG 151/20 gunpods for air-to-air combat.

The {{Specs|name}} was introduced in [[Update 1.65 "Way of the Samurai"]], splitting the Fw 190 A-5 into a folder with /U12 and the /U2. The A-5/U12, similar to other Fw 190s, is an excellent climber and diver while being a poor turner. The plane can manoeuvre vertically quite well and can out-dive opponents. However, after about 600 km/h the controls tend to stiffen up, so care should be taken while in dives. Rocking two [[MG 151 (20 mm)|20 mm MG 151]] cannons, an armoured radial engine, armoured fuel tanks, and sometimes external gunpods, this aircraft is far from shy in the role of giving and taking. Anything at 12 o'clock is soon to be dead. The wing root mounted cannons should be additionally placed on a separate key for head-on attacks. You have a lot of ammunition at your expense, 1800 rounds of 7.92 mm [[MG 17 (7.92 mm)|MG 17]], and 500 rounds of 20 mm MG 151, meaning that aces are achievable in one sortie with excellent aim.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 642 || 621 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 21.7 || 22.5 || 10.6 || 10.6 || rowspan="2" | 391
|-
! Upgraded
| 693 || 666 || 19.5 || 20.6 || 18.4 || 14.1
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 912 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || - || 700 || 310 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 300 || < 550 || > 320
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 3 mm Steel - Engine cowling
* 5 mm Steel - Engine cowling
* 6 mm Steel - Under engine plate
* 8 mm Steel - Under fuel tanks
* 5 mm Steel - Behind rear fuel tank
* 8 mm Steel - Seat plate
* 6 mm Steel - Seat plate
* 12 mm Steel - Headrest plate
* 57 mm Bulletproof glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, wing-mounted (250 rpg = 500 total)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (900 rpg = 1,800 total)

The two cannons are arranged with one mounted in each of the wings near the wing roots and the two machine guns mounted in the upper fuselage just in front of the pilot. The wing mounted cannons are armed with 250 rounds of ammunition each while the upper fuselage machine guns are armed with 900 rounds each.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 4 x 20 mm MG 151/20 cannons, wing-mounted (gunpods) (125 rpg = 500 total)

The four cannons are arranged into two bundles of two mounted under each wing. If fired continuously with the aircraft-mounted cannons, the gun pods will run out of ammo first.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
At the beginning of a battle, it is preferable to climb slightly to the sides to ensure that you have the altitude advantage over the enemy without having to encounter them head-on in a low energy climb state, while staying close enough to the engagement to intervene once they appear. Like all Fw 190s, the turn rate of the A-5/U12 is abysmal compared to most other aircraft you will meet, so out-turning opponents should not be attempted. However, the short wings on the plane are do give it an advantage over similar craft at its BR in terms of strength, and can easily survive several magnitudes of G-force - which is one of the few options available to the A-5/U12 for defence. Vertical engagements and energy retention are a must.

Once researched, the plane gains the option to mount two dual 20 mm MG 151 gun pods; however, as expected, this add-on hampers climb rate and aerodynamics and should be reserved for bomber hunting missions.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Powerful engine - steady climber, does not overheat frequently
* Access to dual 20 mm MG 151 cannon pods - one on each wing
* Resilient wings - great diver
* Good accuracy
* Amazing roll rate
* Great resiliency - shrugging off hits
* Up to six 20 mm MG 151 will shred bombers with ease
* One of the highest amount of unlockable camouflages in-game
* Long and sturdy landing gears allows some tough landings

'''Cons:'''

* External cannon pods negatively affect aerodynamics and weight
* Poor turning as a monoplane fighter
* Mediocre climb rate
* Has thick canopy frames and tall instrument panel that block the pilot's forward views in simulator
* Sensitive in roll axis, can be hard for new simulator pilots to pull off accurate shots without over-rolling the plane
* No combat flaps
* Poor stall control

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The Focke-Wulf Fw 190 Wuerger (Shrike) was a single-seat, single-engine monoplane fighter used by the Luftwaffe in WWII. One of the best fighters of the time, it was widely used during the Second World War. A total of over 20,000 were produced, including some 6,000 fighter-bomber variants. The 190 remained in production from 1941 until the end of the war, going through multiple redesigns. The Fw 190 made a name for itself as a true Luftwaffe workhorse and was used in a wide variety of roles, including a high-altitude interceptor (especially the Fw 190 D), escort fighter, fighter-bomber and night fighter.

1942 flight tests of the Fw 190 A-3 proved that the installation of additional equipment could shift the plane's center of gravity. To address the issue, the aircraft had to be lengthened. First examples, designated Fw 190 A-5, saw combat in November 1942. Other modifications were minor and included improved oxygen equipment and a new artificial horizon. All production aircraft were also equipped with the FuG 25a IFF set. The armament remained unchanged.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=fw-190a-5 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|3rItAzE_zVU|'''Gunpod Baby! or not? Fw 190 A-5/U12 - Germany - Review!''' - ''Jengar''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[Fw 190 A-5]]{{-}}[[Fw 190 A-5 (Japan)]]
* [[Fw 190 A-5/U2]]
* [[Fw 190 A-5/U14]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wikipedia:Focke-Wulf_Fw_190_Würger|[Wikipedia] Focke-Wulf Fw 190 Würger]]
* [https://forum.warthunder.ru/index.php?/topic/197160-fw-190-a-5-u12/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance (Russian Forum)]

{{AirManufacturer Focke-Wulf}}
{{Germany fighters}}