{{About
| about = German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Fw 190 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=fw-190a-1
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.39]]. The Focke-Wulf Fw 190 Wuerger (Shrike) was a single-seat, single-engine monoplane fighter used by the Luftwaffe in WWII. One of the best fighters of the time, it was widely used during the Second World War. A total of over 20,000 were produced, including some 6,000 fighter-bomber variants. The 190 remained in production from 1941 until the end of the war, going through multiple redesigns. The Fw 190 made a name for itself as a true Luftwaffe workhorse and was used in a wide variety of roles, including a high-altitude interceptor (especially the [[Fw 190 D-9|Fw 190 D]]), escort fighter, [[Fw 190 F-8|fighter-bomber]] and night fighter.

The officially designated nickname "Würger" denotes a kind of carnivorous bird (a shrike), but can also be translated as choker, or strangler. In that regard fits the contemporary English designation well, too: "Butcher-bird".

The Fw 190A-1, as all the planes in this line, are some of the best Boom and Zoomers in the game and should be flown exclusively in this style. The performance at high speeds is excellent, as is their dive and zoom characteristics. Do not ever engage in a turnfight as a "furball" with superior turners such as the A6M2 will end badly. Instead fight mainly in the vertical. Try to have an altitude, or speed advantage over your opponents (by climbing to the side at the start of the battle and then enter the highest battle you see). It is still possible to subdue your opponent with the A-1 due to the fantastic roll rate of the "Würger".

Unlike the later 190 line ([[Fw 190 A-8|A-8]] and up), the A-1 through [[Fw 190 A-5|A-5]] all possess higher turn capabilities than the rest of the line. The A-1 can, in general, out turn less manoeuvrable planes such as the [[LaGG-3 (Family)|LaGG-3]]. Still, it is not recommended to out-turn, as the A-1 will be placed with many higher-manoeuvring fighters.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
Your control surfaces become noticeably less responsive at low speeds so keep up to speed.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,500 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 629 || 615 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 21.3 || 22.1 || 10.9 || 10.9 || rowspan="2" | 450
|-
! Upgraded
| 676 || 652 || 19.2 || 20.2 || 17.9 || 14.1
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 700 || 310 || ~14 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 300 || < 550 || > 320
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 468 m || 1,512 hp || 1,633 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 4,283 m || 1,468 hp || 1,585 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 57 mm Bulletproof glass in front of pilot.
* 8 & 12 mm Steel plates on pilot's seat.
* 3 & 5 mm Steel plates in front of oil cooling system.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

While the Focke Wulf retains it dive abilities even without all upgrades, getting to a vantage point to utilize these strength can prove difficult. Therefore unlocks in the category "flight performance" are a must, especially those which grant increased climb rate (e.g. "Engine", "Compressor"). New 20 mm belts are also a good choice, as the "Air targets" belt improves the damage significantly. "Stealth" belt for the 20 mm is also favorable due to the composition of the belt, consisting of 3/5 Minengeschoß, and the lack of tracers make aiming easier by not notifying your enemy of your shots, keeping them calm. The 20 mm cannon upgrade is hardly worth though, it tends to run out of ammo before it can overheat, but they can reduce cannon spread. Different story for the 7 mm LMGs though. They should be a tertiary priority.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG FF/M (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm MG FF/M cannons, wing-mounted (90 rpg = 180 total)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (900 rpg = 1,800 total)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, wing-mounted (1,000 rpg = 2,000 total)

Unlike the [[He 112 B-0]] with 2 x MG FF cannons, the Fw 190 has 2 x MG FF/M cannons, which are identical except for the re-engineered shells and barrel for the MG FF/M. The "M" variant has access to the deadly Minengeschoss shells (mine shells) that can wreak havoc on most planes at the rank. However, keep in mind the brutally low velocity of the MG FF/M shells. Fire when within 400 m of your quarry for best results. 

The MG 17 LMGs are not effective against most planes. However, when equipped with Stealth belts these MGs can turn into powerful anti-ground destroyers. Armoured cars and AAA are great targets for the MGs. 

Watch your ammo count: the Fw 190 A-1 has only 90 rounds per gun. The lower rate of fire on the 20 mm MG FF/M cannons can work in your favour, however.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

When engaging enemy fighters, do it on your terms by climbing first to gain an altitude and energy advantage. Perform boom and zoom attacks by flying over your target, gaining speed by diving towards and take them out before they can evade, but watch your speed and altitude as the the Fw 190's elevators are quite unresponsive and take some time to get used to. You can then climb back quickly at a secure altitude before any opposition tries to catch up. In Arcade, you can go bomber hunting, as you are not limited by ammo count and the Minengeschoß will make short work of the bombers. Finally, you can also perform ground attack on soft targets. Remember to maintain speed when ground-pounding, as an enemy fighter can blow you out of the air if you have no energy.

When attacked, you can often just dive away from planes, such as [[Spitfire Mk IIb|Spitfires]] and [[La-5]]s, but you need to be at a decent altitude to gain top speed, so do not be to quick to dive after an enemy, if they fly below your plane. Unless you are higher then everybody else, or alone. Just be sure then to have the time to regain the lost altitude. The Fw 190 A-1's superb roll rate also allows for going on a horizontal evasive. In a dive the 190 can, due its short wings, pull quite some stunts to either lose the hunter, or even make him loose his own wings.

Sharp rolling scissors can be effective. This is favourable strategy against [[La-5 (Family)|La-5]], [[Yak-9 (Family)|Yak9]] & Spitfire fighters who have due their low wingloading (and partly wooden wings for the Soviets), less resistance against high G manoeuvres. Again be sure to regain your energy by a zoom-climb. Just look out while doing so, many pilots die as they do not notice a second enemy aircraft approaching. German proverb:"Wenn Zwei sich streiten, freut sich der Dritte." ~ "When two quarrel, the third will reap the success." Of course this could also be you.

;Specific enemies worth noting

When flying this plane, a common foe will be Spitfires due to the fact that they can climb higher than you and also out turn you by a significant margin. However, as they have weaker wings, a dive with rolls to change direction will send them crashing to their deaths.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Plenty of LMG ammo
* Great top speed
* Great energy retention & zoom-climbs
* Great high-speed manoeuvrability
* Great roll rate
* Decent steady climb rate
* Agile plane
* Cannons are more than enough against all fighters given Air targets belts
* Excellent flaps

'''Cons:'''

* Poor stall control
* Poor turn rate
* Elevator is not too responsive, takes time to get used to it
* Low ammo count for 20 mm cannons
* No external payload for use against ground forces
* MG FF/M cannons have a low damage output

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

===Design===
The Focke Wulf Fw 190 was a highly advanced aircraft for its time and was given the nickname 'Würger' (Shrike), it was nicknamed "The Butcher Bird"  because of its killing ability. The aircraft had speed and durability as its main strengths.  The aircraft was all metal with a stressed all-duralumin skin.

===Development===
The Fw 190 was conceived in 1937 , the first prototype flew in June 1939. The undercarriage was wide-tracked, which gave the Fw 190 much greater stability compared to the Bf 109 and allowed it to take off and land on runways that other German fighters such as the Bf 109 found difficult. The first tests of the aircraft were in 1940 and few problems were discovered. Focke-Wulf completed 102 190 A-1s at the Bremen and Marienburg factories between June and October 1941. The previous A-0 was a production test run and saw no front-line fighting.

===Combat usage===
The A-1 series was the first of the Fw 190s to be used in active combat sorties. It first went into battle in the summer of 1941. The first combat model had a top speed of 388 mph from its 1600 hp engine. The first record of combat was with Spitfires in June 1941 where the Fw 190 performed well though the pilots complained of a lack of firepower. This criticism led to the Mk II version, which had two wing-mounted synchronised 20 mm cannons and two MG 17 guns. The Mk II version had a top speed of 382 mph. This armament and speed made it a match for the Mk V Spitfire that was in service then.

Over the channel and after the battle of Britain, the Luftwaffe faced harassment in form of "Circus Operations".
Continuous attacks by daylight bombers ([[Blenheim Mk IV|Bristol Blenheim]]), heavily guarded by fighter squadrons flying [[Spitfire Mk Vb/trop|Spitfire V]]. These were not strategical, or even tactical assaults, but distractions, to keep German forces bound to the Western front, giving the Eastern front a little more freedom. They were however ineffective and required only little countermeasures.

The same tactics used by the British six months earlier were now adopted by the Germans.

One of these squadrons facing this flying circus was JagdGeschwader 26 equipped with Bf 109 F-4 and the new Fw 190 A-1.

In July 1941, parts of JG26 were moved to Le Bourget. Here they were the first to be trained on the Focke Wulf 190 A-1. Following August, the 6. squadron of Gruppe II was equipped entirely with the new fighter and until September the entire group was refitted. Still [[Bf 109 F-4|Bf 109F-4]] remained in service with them and ultimately the Messerschmitt would stick as the units fighter type. They remained at the channel coast until the end of year. With 79 aerial victories, but only 24 total losses, the Fw 190 gained its first prestige.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=fw-190a-1 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|PIVWv96kKOI|'''How To Fly The {{PAGENAME}} - Tutorial And Gameplay''' - ''TheLoganatorz''|pNNDfnXOMSo|'''{{PAGENAME}} Defensive Techniques Tutorial I''' - ''Green Fury''|_xdMVz4-XP8|'''{{PAGENAME}} Defensive Techniques VS Spitfires Tutorial II''' - ''Green Fury''|Cco0ISu6nr8|'''{{PAGENAME}} - Death By Realism''' - ''Napalmratte'' Review starts at 03:16|vtCKzvbLfNg|'''The Shooting Range #18''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 03:03 discusses the Fw 190 A.}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[Fw 190 (Family)]]

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* [[I-185 (M-82)]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.ru/index.php?/topic/92003-fw-190-a-1/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance (Russian Forum)]
* [[wt:en/news/520--en|[Special] Flight of the "Butcher Bird"]]
* [[wikipedia:Focke-Wulf_Fw_190|[Wikipedia] Focke-Wulf Fw 190]]

{{AirManufacturer Focke-Wulf}}
{{Germany fighters}}