{{About
| about = premium Japanese fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| other
| usage-1 = the German version
| link-1 = Fw 190 A-5
| usage-2 = other versions
| link-2 = Fw 190 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=fw-190a-5_japan
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} Japanese fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27 as the ''Fw 190 A-5/U3'', but was renamed to ''Fw 190 A-5'' in Update 1.35.

Rocking four 20 mm cannons, an armoured radial engine and armoured fuel tanks, this aircraft is far but shy in the giving and taking role. Anything at 12 o'clock is soon to be smithereens. The wing root mounted cannons should be additionally placed on a separate key for head-on attacks. The outer-wing guns would only miss on distances of 800-1,000 m (~0.7 miles). This also helps for tricky shots, as the second pair of 20 mm guns only have 90 shots each, instead of the whopping 250 of the inner ones. But make sure to bring hell loose once the optimal firing solution is reached.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,800 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 623 || 603 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 23.2 || 24.1 || 10.8 || 10.8 || rowspan="2" | 420
|-
! Upgraded
| 675 || 648 || 20.8 || 22.0 || 18.2 || 14.1
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 700 || 310 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 300 || < 550 || > 320
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 57 mm Bulletproof glass in front of the cockpit
* 3-5 mm Steel plates in front of oil cooling system
* 6 mm Steel plate under the radial engine
* 12 mm Steel plate in pilot's headrest, and an 8 + 6 mm steel plates behind the pilot
* 8 mm Steel plate under the cockpit
* 5 mm Steel plate behind the fuel tank

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG FF/M (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, wing-mounted (250 rpg = 500 total)
* 2 x 20 mm MG FF/M cannons, wing-mounted (90 rpg = 180 total)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (900 rpg = 1,800 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The Fw 190 A-5, as all the planes in this line, are some of the best Boom & Zoomers in the game and should be flown exclusively in this style. The performance at high speeds is excellent, as is their dive and zoom characteristics. Do not ever engage in a turn fight as this will most likely end badly, instead only fight in the vertical. Try to have an altitude, or speed advantage over the opponents (by climbing to the side at the start of the battle and then enter the highest dogfight). But the Fw 190 can still win fights when in a lower energy state than the foe.

In the defensive, best option is to just dive away from planes, such as [[Spitfire F Mk IX|Spitfires]] and [[La-5FN|La-5]]s, but it needs to be at a decent altitude to gain top speed, so do not be too quick to dive after an enemy if they are flying at a lower altitude. Unless the Fw 190 is higher than everybody else, or alone. Just be sure then to have the time to regain the lost altitude.

In a dive, the 190 can, due to its short wings, pull quite some ''stunts'' to either lose the hunter or even make him lose his own wings! This is favourable strategy against La-5s, [[Yak-9T|Yak]]s & Spitfires who have due to their low wing-loading (and partly wooden wings for the Russians), less resistance against high G manoeuvres. Again be sure to regain energy by a zoom-climb. Just look out while doing so, many pilots die as they do not notice a second enemy aircraft approaching. German proverb:''"Wenn Zwei sich streiten, freut sich der Dritte."'' ~ "When two quarrel, the third will reap the success." Of course, this could also be highlighting an opportunity to take in the skies.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Best roll rate
* Good climb rate
* Performs very well in dives
* Good at Boom & Zoom
* Excellent firepower

'''Cons:'''

* Engine overheats fast
* Not that fast in level flight
* Turns poorly
* Not much defensive possibilities (only dive and scissors)

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
{{main|Fw_190_A-5#History|l1=History of the Fw 190 A-5}}

In 1943, the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service imported one [[Fw 190 A-5|Fw 190 A-5]] from Germany,<ref name="DyerJapan">Dyer 2009, p.147</ref> which was delivered via submarine. The Fw 190 A-5 model was tested at the Fussa airfield, the Imperial Japanese Army's central testing facility for aircraft. The plane was flown by Lieutenant Commander Aramaki Yoshitsugu, who found the Fw 190 cockpit size just right as opposed to the tightness of the [[Bf_109_E-7_(Japan)|Bf 109]] or the spaciousness of a [[P-40E-1|P-40]].<ref name="ArawasiFw190">Arawasi, 2014</ref>

The Fw 190 A-5 was also tested alongside Japanese aircraft and prototypes, including the prototypes that would be the [[Ki-84_ko|Ki-84]] and [[Ki-100]]. During these, it was deemed that the Fw 190 performance was similar to that of the Ki-84. Overall Japanese impression of the Fw 190 A-5 was positive, with better firepower than most other Japanese planes, reliable electric systems, fine craftsmanship, and a reliable engine.<ref name="ArawasiFw190" />

The Allies predicted that the Japanese would use the Fw 190 as a fighter aircraft and gave the Fw 190 the nickname "Fred" in 1942.<ref name="DyerJapan" /><ref name="HansonFred">Hanson, n.d.</ref> However, it is not known if the Japanese ever used the Fw 190 in combat purposes against the Allies. The last known reported the presence of the Fw 190 A-5 was it being loaned to a reconnaissance unit, with its ultimate fate unknown but presumably lost.<ref name="ArawasiFw190" />

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The Focke-Wulf Fw 190 Wuerger (Shrike) was a single-seat, single-engine monoplane fighter used by the Luftwaffe in WWII. One of the best fighters of the time, it was widely used during the Second World War. A total of over 20,000 were produced, including some 6,000 fighter-bomber variants. The 190 remained in production from 1941 until the end of the war, going through multiple redesigns. The Fw 190 made a name for itself as a true Luftwaffe workhorse and was used in a wide variety of roles, including a high-altitude interceptor (especially the Fw 190 D), escort fighter, fighter-bomber and night fighter.

1942 flight tests of the Fw 190 A-3 proved that the installation of additional equipment could shift the plane's center of gravity. To address the issue, the aircraft had to be lengthened. First examples, designated Fw 190 A-5, saw combat in November 1942. Other modifications were minor and included improved oxygen equipment and a new artificial horizon. All production aircraft were also equipped with the FuG 25a IFF set. The armament remained unchanged.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=fw-190a-5_japan Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|vy_DJLkEe7M|'''Japanese FW-190 A-5 Review. Nerfed but still fun!''' - ''Joseph 2000''|V7hdHG_h6ps|'''Premium Review: Japanese Fw 190 A-5''' - ''Jengar''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development
* [[Fw 190 A-5]]

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era
* [[Ki-84 (Family)]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

;Citations
<references />

;Bibliography

* Arawasi. "Japanese Focke-Wulf Fw 190." WildEagles. N.p., 22 Jan. 2014. Web. 01 Feb. 2018. [http://arawasi-wildeagles.blogspot.com/2014/01/japanese-focke-wulf-fw-190.html Website].
* Dyer, Edwin M. ''Japanese Secret Projects: Experimental Aircraft of the IJA and IJN, 1939-1945''. Midland, 2009.
* Hanson, David. "Focke-Wulf Fw 190A5 (Fred)." Dave's Warbirds. N.p., n.d. Web. 01 Feb. 2018. [http://www.daveswarbirds.com/Nippon/aircraft/Fred.htm Website].

{{AirManufacturer Focke-Wulf}}
{{Japan fighters}}
{{Japan premium aircraft}}