{{About
| about = German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Fw 190 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=fw-190d-12
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 9,700 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 695 || 675 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 22.9 || 23.8 || 12.9 || 12.9 || rowspan="2" | 317
|-
! Upgraded
| 759 || 725 || 20.1 || 21.6 || 26.7 || 17.1
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 700 || 310 || ~12 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 300 || < 550 || > 320
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 3,900 m || 1,632 hp || 2,007 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 7,300 m || 1,658 hp || 2,039 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 3
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 9,700 m || 1,343 hp || 1,652 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 3 mm Steel - Engine cowl armour
* 8 mm Steel - Under cockpit/fuel tank armour
* 5 mm Steel - Rear fuel tank armour
* 8 mm Steel - Pilot's seat armour
* 6 mm Steel - Pilot's seat armour
* 12 mm Steel - Headrest armour
* 57 mm Bulletproof Glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MK 108 (30 mm)|MG 151 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 30 mm MK 108 cannon, nose-mounted (85 rpg)
* 2 x 20 mm MG 151 cannons, wing-mounted (220 rpg = 440 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|SC500K (500 kg)|Flam C 250 incendiary|Flam C 500 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 4 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (200 kg total)
* 8 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (400 kg total)
* 1 x 250 kg SC250JA bomb + 4 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (450 kg total)
* 1 x 250 kg SC250JA bomb (250 kg total)
* 1 x 500 kg SC500K bomb (500 kg total)
* 1 x 500 kg SC500K bomb + 4 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (700 kg total)
* 1 x Flam C 250 incendiary bomb
* 1 x Flam C 500 incendiary bomb

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The Fw 190 D-12 was developed and tested alongside the [[Fw 190 D-13]]. They share the same airframe and engine performance with the only difference between the D-12 and the D-13 being the cannon mounted in the propeller. (The D-12 was tested with a Mk 108 30 mm cannon while the D-13 was tested with an MG 151 20 mm cannon in the propeller)

Due to the D-12 and D-13 being so similar, you can fly them almost identically. (Keeping in mind the differing armament velocities at longer ranges)  the Fw 190 D-12 has a high top speed for its BR, heavy armament with a large ammunition pool, a fantastic engine built for high-altitude performance and it features hydraulic ailerons for an amazingly high-speed roll rate. It is one of the only prop driven aircraft able to reach speeds exceeding 450 mph (725 km/h) while still retaining some ability to manoeuvre. The D-12 is an energy fighter, the plane relies on speed and engine power to be successful. With its high burst mass of and the destructive power of the Minengeschoß rounds, no bomber in the game can survive a short burst. Against fighters, the MK 108 is as usual difficult to aim and hit. Not to mention just overkill. As both guns have different ballistics, bind a separate key for your MG 151s. This makes aiming easier, saves ammo and is still sufficient enough against any fighter.

The Fw 190 D-12 is most effective at climbing above your foe and employing standard Boom and Zoom tactics. Keeping in mind that at 700 km/h+, the flight surfaces of the Dora series notoriously compress and pulling out at those speeds can be tricky, however, it has been found that because of the fuselage mounted fuel tanks in the Dora series, taking higher fuel loads will cut the amount of time it takes to pull out of those high-speed dives by up to 50% (50% when comparing minimum fuel load to full fuel load.

One of the most known abilities of the Fw 190 series is their ability to out roll enemies such as the Spitfire that "lock up" at higher speeds. If attacked from above and if the enemy is at a higher speed than the D-12, it is possible to perform a series of rolls called a "scissors". The goal of this manoeuvre is to both avoid the enemy's guns by rolling out of the way as well as allowing that enemy to overshoot, resulting in the Dora pilot tailing the would-be killer. Although difficult, manoeuvres such as these can turn the tables in a one-on-one dogfight and ensure survival.

Attempt every deflection shot possible, and if the rounds are not hitting the target pull harder. It is better to have rounds fly in front of an enemy plane than miles behind them. In order to pull ahead, make good use of combat/landing flaps. However, remember not to activate them at high speeds as they will rip off causing a momentary loss of control.

The role of the ''Bomb Dora'' can be done by any 190 D. A wide arrangement of payloads is possible. But none of them is powerful enough to go for strategic bomb zones. In addition the 50 kg bombs can only be dropped in pairs in RB & SB. In combination with the lack of an aiming reticle, it is suggested to not carry the small bombs in addition  to your ''main'' payload. Bridges, heavy tanks and heavy pillboxes should be the primary target for the 500 kg bomb. The other targets can be destroyed with ease by allied [[:Category:Attackers|attackers]].

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>3 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Excellent energy retention and dive acceleration and top-speed in a dive
* Great speed on low altitude
* Great high-speed manoeuvrability
* Great aileron control and roll speed
* Great & heavy armament
* Good ammo supply
* Good climb-rate
* Water injection ("MW50" -> WEP in-game) lasts at least 30 minutes

'''Cons:'''

* Awful turn-rate below high-speeds
* Enormous turn cycle
* Prone to overheating

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The Focke-Wulf Fw 190 Wuerger (Shrike) was a single-seat single-engine monoplane fighter used by the Luftwaffe in WWII. One of the best fighters of the time, it was widely used during the Second World War. A total of over 20,000 were produced, including some 6,000 fighter-bomber variants. The 190 remained in production from 1941 until the end of the war, going through multiple redesigns. The Fw 190 made a name for itself as a true Luftwaffe workhorse and was used in a wide variety of roles, including a high-altitude interceptor (especially the Fw 190D), escort fighter, fighter-bomber and night fighter.

The Fw 190 D 'Dora', or 'Long-Nosed 190' to the Allies, was intended as an interim solution while the Ta 152 was being readied. However, the Dora ended up being one of the finest Focke-Wulf designs of the entire war. The aircraft was armed with two synchronized MG 17s and four wing-mounted MG 151s. Initially, Luftwaffe pilots regarded the Dora with some suspicion. The Jumo 213 was believed to be a bomber engine and its installation on a fighter was considered a desperate measure. However, as soon as they had a chance to fight in the Dora-9, the pilots changed their minds. The new variant, compared to its BMW 801-powered predecessor, performed better in the vertical and in a dive. Additionally, it had a phenomenal roll rate. The pilots quickly found that the Jumo 213-powered Focke-Wulf was superior to the venerable P-51B Mustang.

A total of 650 to 700 Fw 190 D series fighters were produced. By December 1944, the Focke-Wulf plant in Marienburg produced 8 Fw 190 Ds each day, even though the factory appeared completely destroyed from the air.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=fw-190d-12 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.ru/index.php?/topic/94911-fw-190-d-12/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance (Russian Forum)]

{{AirManufacturer Focke-Wulf}}
{{Germany fighters}}