{{Specs-Card
|code=g4m1
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''G4M''', designated as the '''Type 1 Ground-based Attack Bomber ({{Annotation|一式陸上攻撃機|Ichi Shiki Rikujo Kōgekiki}})''', was a Japanese bomber that improved on the previous G3M model. It had high performance and long range, but it sacrificed armour and crew protection to reduce weight. This made it vulnerable to enemy fire and earned it the nickname "flying lighter". Despite its flaws, it was the most widely used and most famous bomber by Japan in World War II. It participated in many battles and missions, such as the sinking of the British battleships HMS Prince of Wales and HMS Repulse in 1941, and the bombing of Darwin in 1942.

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' has been around since the Open Beta Test before Update 1.27. It can perform well as an attacker, especially later in the battle, because it can carry a lot of bombs (4 x 250 kg or 12 x 60 kg) and destroy many targets. However, bombing bases is risky, because the plane will be exposed to enemy fighters who will climb to intercept it. It is better off attacking ground targets like Light Pillboxes, tanks and guns, or ships with the 250 kg bombs. Climbing is not advisable in the G4M1, because it will need friendly fighters to cover it, but they will have to deal with the Allied planes first. The pilot has to be skilled with the rear gunner, or the plane will be shot down easily by an enemy behind it. The 20 mm cannon is powerful, but hard to hit with. The other guns on the G4M1 are weak, but use them if possible.

;Nicknames

* IJN Pilot abbreviation: ''Rikukō (陸攻, "Land Attack")''
* IJN Pilot nickname: ''Hamaki (葉巻, Cigar)''
* Allied reporting name: ''Betty''
* Allied nickname: ''Flying Lighter''

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 431 || 422 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 33.2 || 33.6 || 5.1 || 5.1 || rowspan="2" | 314
|-
! Upgraded
| 471 || 452 || 31.2 || 32.0 || 10.2 || 7.2
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 427 || 398 || 250 || ~5 || ~3
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 360 || < 360 || < 360 || > 324
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 2,600 m || 2,800 hp || 3,125 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 5,600 m || 2,560 hp || 2,857 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

The bomber has no dedicated armour protection, however, it still features relatively good survivability for a Japanese bomber. All of its fuel tanks are self-sealing, making it likely to survive burning wings, and significantly increasing survival chances under low to medium-calibre gunfire. Furthermore, the [[Type 99 Model 1 (20 mm)|20 mm rear cannon]] provides an opportunity to quickly dispatch tailing fighters. This, in a combination with a narrow silhouette, makes rear aspect engagement the preferable way of dealing with incoming enemy fighters.

What should be avoided are enemies incoming from top and bottom, especially those equipped with 20 mm cannons, as the large and fragile wing area makes for an easy target.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

This plane needs to be fast to avoid trouble and good at defending itself- stock, it can do both things, but not very well. It is suggested that you research Engine and flight performance modifications as quickly as possible so you can skirt around the edge of the map, away from fighters. Alternatively, if you believe you can handle fighters, research the defensive armament lines first. Bomb load-outs are the next most important thing- fortunately, since research at this rank costs very little time, you can research defensive armament and bomb load-outs alternately; this will make the G4M1 an effective weapon. Protection is non-existent for the G4M1, so you should research survivability upgrades last, as it will not help you survive fighter attacks.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)|Navy Type 98 Number 25 (250 kg)|Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 (250 kg)|Navy Type Number 50 Model 2 (500 kg)}}
{{main|Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP (800 kg)|Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)|Type 91 Model 3 (850 kg)|Type 91 Model 2 (835 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 12 x 60 kg Navy Type 97 Number 6 bombs (720 kg total)
* 4 x 250 kg Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 4 x 250 kg Navy Type 98 Number 25 bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 1 x 500 kg Navy Type Number 50 Model 2 bomb (500 kg total)
* 1 x 835 kg Type 91 Model 2 torpedo
* 1 x 850 kg Type 91 Model 3 torpedo
* 1 x 800 kg Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP bomb (800 kg total)
* 1 x 800 kg Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 bomb (800 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Type 99 Model 1 (20 mm)|Type 92 (7.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 20 mm Type 99 Model 1 cannon, tail turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, nose turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, dorsal turret (1,000 rpg)
* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, 2 x beam turrets (1,000 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Comparing to its contemporaries, the G4M1 has a somewhat above average climb rate and top speed. Where it has an advantage is in the defensive armament, which, however, cannot be completely relied upon, due to the unreliability of the AI gunners and the relative fragility of the medium bombers.

As a result, the best use of the G4M1 is in dropping general-purpose bombs on enemy bases and emplacements from a high altitude, in particular for the arcade battles. Here an extra care should be taken when selecting bomb load, in order to choose payloads with maximum TNT equivalent for its destructive potential, as opposite to armour-piercing bombs. Also, worth noting, that the [[Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)|800 kg Number 80 Model 1]] bomb does more damage to the enemy base than the four [[Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 (250 kg)|250 kg Number 25 Model 2]] bombs, despite them having a higher total TNT equivalent. 250 kg bombs, however, are perfect for engaging enemy pillboxes and vehicles, owning it to their 116 m destruction radius of a soft targets, and 5 m of the armoured targets.

For the anti-naval duty, the [[B6N1 Model 11|B6N family]] or [[D4Y (Family)|D4Y family]] typically do a better job, in particular as a torpedo carrier, due to its smaller size and vastly superior maneuverability.

Low-altitude attacks against vehicles would be best left to the [[D4Y3 Ko]], within the same BR it carried triple 250 kg bombs (1 less), but it's far more manoeuvrable and to a limited degree can double as a fighter with its twin 7.7 mm machine guns.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Excellent mix of bombs and torpedoes, suitable against all kinds of targets
* Good manoeuvrability and top speed for a medium bomber
* Good defensive capability with the tail 20 mm cannon
* Self-sealing fuel tanks (although still quite unreliable)

'''Cons:'''

* No armour means it can't take very many hits without adverse effects
* Large wings means larger targets for the enemy

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
Designed as a lightweight medium bomber, the G4M1 sacrificed protection in order to achieve high-speed and an operational range of 2,850 km. Unfortunately, this made the plane extremely vulnerable to Allied fighters and anti-aircraft fire who found the engines and fuel tanks particularly flammable. The plane's finest hour was the sinking of the HMS Repulse and HMS Prince Of Wales, the first two capital ships sunk in open waters by aircraft during wartime.

The plane also played a role in the final hours of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto. Two G4M1 bombers of the Kōkūtai 705, escorted by 6 A6M2 fighters Kōkūtai 204, were to carry him from Rabaul to Balalae Airfield near Bougainville Island. Admiral Yamamoto's purpose in traveling to Balalae Airfield was to inspect Japanese aircraft participating in Operation I-Go, and to boost morale following the intense battles at Guadalcanal. However, U.S. naval intelligence decrypted orders sent to Japanese commanders regarding the itinerary, escorting forces, and which units were be toured. In Operation Vengeance, 18 P-38G Lightnings were sent to intercept Yamamoto, which ended in both G4M1 bombers shot down. The bomber with Yamamoto crashed in the jungle, killing him, and the other, holding his staff, crashed at the sea.

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The long-range twin-engine Mitsubishi G4M torpedo bomber had a relatively small bomb load of 1,000 kg but a long flight range of about 6,000 km.

Because of the Washington Naval Agreement, Japan was far behind in fleet construction. Therefore, to guard against potential enemy warships, the 10-Shi specification was created, calling for a long-range, twin-engine torpedo bomber.

The power plant consisted of two engines with 1,530 horsepower. The plane was the first Japanese plane in history to use retractable landing gear.

Needing to make weight cutbacks to construct a high-speed and long-range bomber, the designers abandoned fuel tank protection, assuming that the G4M1 would be able to flee from enemy fighters. The designers' hopes did not materialize: the wings (where the fuel tanks were located) easily caught fire, and at the war's start, fighters which could catch up to the bombers without much difficulty were already in the air.

All in all, 1,170 G4M1s were constructed.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=g4m1 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|6yUrv5UsiXU|'''The Shooting Range #183''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 03:40 discusses the G4M "Betty".}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Mitsubishi}}
{{Japan bombers}}