{{Specs-Card
|code=h6k4
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Japanese bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
The H6K4 has decidedly bad flight performance given its large size. The aircraft has an abysmal top speed, meaning that it can be outrun by most biplanes at its battle rating. As well, the aircraft has lacklustre acceleration, and an almost-nonexistent climb rate. The aircraft's manoeuvrability is just as bad, given its massive size - turning and rolling are all rather difficult manoeuvres to perform. The aircraft can feel extremely sluggish (basically a brick with wings) when performing manoeuvres, even more so than conventional heavy bombers. The aircraft's camera angle in AB/RB is also extremely weird, as it looks downwards onto the aircraft. On the plus side, the aircraft has a slow stall speed, to permit its use as a hydroplane.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,100 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 311 || 303 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 23.3 || 24.0 || 5.3 || 5.3 || rowspan="2" | 396
|-
! Upgraded
| 341 || 325 || 22.0 || 22.6 || 8.9 || 6.9
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 498 || 469 || 320 || ~3 || ~2
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 240 || < 240 || < 240 || > 341
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 1,500 m || 1,050 hp || 1,123 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* No armour protection
* Non-self-sealing fuel tanks (8 in the mid-fuselage, 6 in each wing)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)|Navy Type 98 Number 25 (250 kg)|Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 (250 kg)|Navy Type Number 50 Model 2 (500 kg)}}
{{main|Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP (800 kg)|Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)}}
{{main|Type 91 Model 2 (835 kg)|Type 91 Model 3 (850 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 12 x 60 kg Navy Type 97 Number 6 bombs (720 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg Navy Type Number 25 Model 2 bombs (500 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg Navy Type 98 Number 25 bombs (500 kg total)
* 2 x 500 kg Navy Type Number 50 Model 2 bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 2 x 800 kg Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 bombs (1,600 kg total)
* 2 x 800 kg Navy Type 99 Number 80 AP bombs (1,600 kg total)
* 2 x 835 kg Type 91 Model 2 torpedoes
* 2 x 850 kg Type 91 Model 3 torpedoes

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Type 99 Model 1 (20 mm)|Type 92 (7.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 20 mm Type 99 Model 1 cannon, tail turret (432 rpg)
* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, nose turret (582 rpg)
* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, 2 x beam turrets (582 rpg)
* 1 x 7.7 mm Type 92 machine gun, dorsal turret (582 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The H6K4 is an interesting aircraft to fly in air battles, given its massive size, decent defensive armament and ordnance load. The aircraft can be used as a conventional bomber in Air battles, delivering its large payload on bases. It can also be used in naval battles, with its large load of two torpedoes and the ability to cap bases. However, no matter what way you play this aircraft, be aware that it is huge. The large size of the aircraft makes it an attractive target for fighters, SPAAs and naval AA guns alike.

The first possible playstyle for the H6K4 is that of a conventional bomber - the aircraft's large payload of 1,600 kg (2 x 800 kg) allows it to destroy bases with ease. However, there are several limitations to this approach that should be considered. Firstly, the aircraft lacks landing gear (because it is a hydroplane), meaning that it is unable to land on conventional airfields. You can still try, but take care to land the aircraft slowly to avoid the risk of crashing. As well, the aircraft only carries two bombs max - this limits the number of bases, or targets, that you can hit. Depending on circumstance, a single bomb may not be enough to destroy a base - in that case, you will need to expend both bombs on a single base.

The second option for this aircraft would be in naval battles. The aircraft's large armament and floatplane abilities allow it to be used as a base-capper. The aircraft carries a pair of Type 91 torpedoes (Model 2 or 3) which are highly effective against any target up to destroyer-size. However, these torpedoes will be hard to aim against small targets such as MTBs, as smaller vessels are typically very manoeuvrable. Note that you may want to attack from afar when flying this aircraft - the aircraft is unarmoured, and any hits from ship-based AA guns may set your large plane on fire.

If being pursued by enemy fighters, the H6K4's massive size and slow speed will prevent it from running away effectively. Thus, your only hope would be the H6K4's defensive armament - this is one sector where the H6K4 excels. Being a Japanese bomber, the H6K is very well armed for its BR and carries a total of five guns. There are four single 7.7 mm machine guns, and a 20 mm cannon in the tail position. However, note that the H6K4 doesn't have any defensive positions underneath the fuselage - after all, it is a hydroplane. This means that you are completely vulnerable from underneath. To remedy this, attempt to bait pursuing aircraft above you or behind - this way, they can be hit by the highly-effective 20 mm cannon defending the rear.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* '''H'''6K for Flying boat:
** Bomber spawn
** Landing floats
*** Can capture points in Naval
** Decent combined defensive armament
** 2 x [[Type 91 Model 3 (850 kg)|Type 91 Aerial Torpedo]]
*** Torpedo has the highest drop speed in the game at {{Annotation|580 km/h|350 mph}} and is one of the most feared torpedoes in Naval Battles
** 12 x [[Navy Type 97 Number 6 (60 kg)|Type 97 No.6 Land Bomb (60 kg)]]
*** Gets 2 x bomb racks of 6 x 60 kg bombs which can be used to hit multiple targets
** 2 x [[Navy Type Number 80 Model 1 (800 kg)|No.80 Land Bomb (800 kg)]]
*** Heaviest bomb Japanese Navy can offer

'''Cons:'''

* '''H'''6K for Flying boat:
** Huge target
** Slow
** Lack of land-suitable gear
*** Very unreliable to land on regular run-ways
** Bombs drop in series
* Common Navy plane construction:
** Poor defensive armament: [[Type 92 (7.7 mm)|7.7 mm Type 92 MG]]
** Fragile, little armour, and no self-sealing fuel tanks
* '''H6K''' specific:
** Awkward default camera angle

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
A quad-engined all-metal parasol-wing monoplane flying boat. An experimental version, the Type S, made its first flight on July 14, 1936. The plane was approved by the Imperial Japanese Navy as Type 97 Large Flying Boat in 1937. Mass production began in 1938.

The most common variant was model 22 (H6K4), created in 1940. The first 119 planes were fitted with a air-cooled 14-cylinder twin-row radial Mitsubishi Kinsei 43 engine (1,000 hp). Afterwards, the slightly more powerful Kinsei 46 was used. The H6K4 carried more fuel than earlier models, increasing its maximum range to 25 hours, or 6,000 km. Its fuselage included waist blisters fitted with machine guns, which required a slightly longer tail section.

The H6K4 was armed with four 7.7 mm Type 97 (Lewis) machine guns with 582 rounds apiece and, in the tail turret, one 20mm Type 99-I cannon with 432 rounds. The flying boat could carry twelve 60-kg bombs, four 250-kg bombs, or two 800-kg Type 91 Model 1 torpedoes.

A major weakness of all H6K flying boats was the lack of protective armour for the crew and for the fuel tanks. This was sacrificed for the sake of its extended flight range. When the plane started to suffer losses in combat, designers of later Model 22 planes began to focus on protecting the crew.

The H6K flying boat's first combat action was a raid on Wake Island on December 11, 1941. The plane was widely used in the Pacific theater during the first part of the war. The H6K ran long-range reconnaissance missions, convoy escort duty, submarine searches, bombing missions, and search and rescue operations. When the newer H8K arrived, the H6K began to be used mostly as a transport plane. The plane was in operation until the Japanese surrender in 1945.

127 H6K4s were built, out of a total of 217 H6Ks.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=h6k4 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|DoZLyWJ5lRw|'''The Shooting Range #222''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 03:55 discusses air combats between the {{PAGENAME}} and B-17s in the Pacific.}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[H8K2]]
* [[H8K3]]

;Aircraft of a similar role, configuration or era

* [[PBY-5 Catalina]]
* [[Sunderland Mk IIIa]]

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/314787-kawanishi-h6k4-mod-22/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Kawanishi}}
{{Japan bombers}}