{{About
| about = German medium bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = He 111 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=he-111h-16_winter
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The He 111 H-16 was one of the many variants built from the He 111. At the beginning, He 111s were powered by Daimler-Benz engines, specifically the DB 600. However, the He 111 E introduced the Junkers Jumo 211 engine, which was a direct competitor to the DB 600. The main difference was the increase in power, but it was relatively the same as the DB 600. Many variants after the He 111 E continued to use the Jumo 211, but there were some exceptions that were powered by the DB 601.

The original He 111 H was fitted with the Junkers Jumo 211 A-1, which produced just under 1,000 hp. The H-16 mainly differed in having more armament and the Jumo 211 F-2 engines. The F-2 engines provided a significant power boost of around 34% compared to the original Jumo 211. Some of the armament changes included the addition of a 20 mm cannon in the nose as well as a 13 mm [[MG 131 (13 mm)|MG 131]] machine gun. Other than the previously stated changes, it was largely the same as the other He 111 H variants.

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to update 1.27. It is arguably the most powerful He 111 in-game due to its defensive armament updates and strong bomb load. Although it lacks the [[PC 1400 X (1,400 kg)|Fritz-X radio-controlled bomb]] found on the [[He 111 H-6]], it has access to the [[SC2500 (2,500 kg)|SC2500]] bomb, which is a 2,400 kg bomb with a 2,720 kg TNT equivalent warhead. The [[MG FF/M (20 mm)|20 mm MG FF/M cannon]] is mounted in the nose of the aircraft, which provides good defense against incoming threats. As for performance, although the H-16 received improved engines, it can very quickly overheat on WEP. Players should be wary of overusing WEP. 
== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 411 || 398 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 32.0 || 32.8 || 2.0 || 2.0 || rowspan="2" | 500
|-
! Upgraded
| 457 || 432 || 30.1 || 31.0 || 8.1 || 4.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 480 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 340 || 327 || 260 || ~4 || ~3
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 310 || < 300 || < 270 || > 330
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

The pilot's seat is set farther back than normal, reducing but not eliminating the chance of a knock-out.

* 5 mm Steel plate under nose gunner
* 10 mm Steel plate behind the pilot
* 8 mm Steel plate in front of the dorsal gunner
* 6 mm Steel plate under ventral gunner
* 8-8.5 mm Steel plates around beam gunner
* 8 mm steel on top of engines

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|SC1000L2 (1,000 kg)|SC2500 (2,500 kg)|Flam C 250 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 32 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (1,600 kg total)
* 8 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs + 1 x 250 kg SC250JA bomb (2,250 kg total)
* 1 x 2,500 kg SC2500 bomb (2,500 kg total)
* 8 x Flam C 250 incendiary bombs

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG FF/M (20 mm)|MG 131 (13 mm)|MG 81 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 20 mm MG FF/M cannon, nose turret (120 rpg)
* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, dorsal turret (1,000 rpg)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 81 machine guns, ventral turret (1,000 + 850 rpg = 1,850 total)
* 1 x 7.92 mm MG 81 machine gun, 2 x beam turrets (500 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

In Arcade, try to maximize altitude upon spawning; this will make it harder for most fighters to reach you in the early moments (only for ground strike). However, this leaves your poorly defended underbelly open to most attacks, so a fighter with a decent engine could easily catch up and take you down. When engaging this bomber, don't worry about the gunners, as they have a very restricted field of, allowing an attack from these angles: 10-2 o'clock high or even 8 o'clock high/5 o'clock high, as well as 9-3 o'clock low or 10 o'clock low/2 o'clock low, as the gunners, cannot reach you there.

In Realistic, as mid-air reload is unavailable, the He 111 can be used as a pseudo-dive bomber to quickly deliver its payload before retreating. The plane can sustain a shallow dive near the redline speed of around 500 km/h, though you should keep an eye on the IAS to prevent from overspeeding and ripping the airframe in the process. The payload of 8 x 250 kg bombs or 2 x 1,000 kg bombs is enough to destroy two bases in normal matches and one in uptier matches. While the single 2,500 kg bomb is certainly very powerful, it can only destroy a single base and wastes potential TNT damage in doing so, thus it should be saved for airfield bombing instead.

In mixed battles, the He 111 H-16 can be played like a miniature [[Pe-8]]. While the SC2500 bomb is nowhere close to the infamous [[FAB-5000 (5,000 kg)|FAB-5000]] bomb, the SC2500 has a massive filler of 2,720 kg of TNT equivalent and a huge destructive radius of 84 m ("only" 21 m less than the FAB-5000) which is still huge enough to destroy multiple ground vehicles and sink any ship within its blast radius. With its smaller and less distinctive airframe, the H-16 can be played more aggressively than its Soviet counterpart, with an option of shallow dive bombing for a more precise drop.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Decent bomb load (can carry up to 32 x 50 kg bombs stock) and up to 2,500 kg total
** Stock payload is highly efficient at carpet bombing tanks, armoured cars, anti-aircraft artillery, etc
** Access to the massive SC2500 bomb with a very high destructive power in mixed battles
* Very good defensive guns (a significant improvement over predecessors)
** 20 mm nose turret can be a nasty surprise to head-on attackers, allows for bomber hunting, and can take out lightly armoured ground targets
* Decent flight characteristics for a bomber
** Good roll rate by bomber standards
** Relatively good performance at higher altitudes
* Surprisingly sturdy airframe clad with some armour offers more chance of survival

'''Cons:'''

* While more well-protected than the previous variants, the H-16 still has several blind spots
** Gunner placements restrict effective defence to the horizontal plane only, with gaps at 2 and 10 o'clock
** Top gunner is limited in effectiveness due to the vertical stabilizer location
** Bottom gunner can't shoot directly behind the plane, more like at a 20-30 degree angle downwards
* Glazed nose exposes the pilot from flak battery and head-on attacks
* As with most bombers (and German planes), the H-16 suffers from poor turning radius which doesn't aid the gunners at all when attacked
* Stock payload is not so effective against bases
* Very vulnerable when being attacked by multiple fighters, due to lack of defensive weapons

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The Heinkel He 111 was a German monoplane medium bomber (also torpedo bomber and attack bomber). The He 111 H-16 was the third standard H-series variant, the other two being H-3 and H-6. Most other variants were generally used in very specialized roles. Specifically, the H-16 was a further development of the H-6 with Jumo 211 F-2 engines, although several other interim variants also introduced minor changes based on combat experience. Defensive armament remained the same as on the H-11.

Many different loadouts were supported; the bomb bay was retained and could also be used for extra fuel tanks. In the latter case, the under-fuselage ETC 2000 bomb rack was used. The H-16 was supplied with several armament kits, including the R-1 with a 13 mm MG 131 in a dorsal turret, the R-2, a glider tug and the R-3, with improved armour at the cost of a lighter bomb carrying capacity.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=he-111h-16_winter Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* Tupolev [[SB 2M (Family)|SB]]
* [[Martin 167-A3]] Maryland
* Mitsubishi [[Ki-21-Ia]]
* Martin [[B-10B]]
* [[Martin 139WC]]
* Fiat [[BR.20 DR]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/504141-heinkel-he-111h-16/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Heinkel}}
{{Germany bombers}}