{{About
| about = gift German fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = He 112 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=he_112b_2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_He_112_B-2_U2.jpg}}
|market=He.112B-2/U2 (Germany)
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium gift rank {{Specs|rank}} German fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27. It was given away during the [[wt:en/news/2646/current|2014 Thanksgiving sale]] as a reward for buying 3 discounted packs. It has also been available in the Warbond shop as part of the trophy chest in [[wt:en/news/5738-news-how-can-you-get-premium-vehicles-warbonds-en|September 2018]] to [[wt:en/news/6065-news-how-can-you-get-premium-vehicles-warbonds-en|March 2019]] and from [[wt:en/news/6605-news-premium-vehicles-for-warbonds-until-the-31st-of-march-en|March 2020]] to [[wt:en/news/6882-warbonds-premium-vehicles-for-warbonds-in-october-en|November 2020]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 2,800 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 482 || 464 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 17.1 || 18.0 || 13.1 || 13.1 || rowspan="2" | 325
|-
! Upgraded
| 525 || 503 || 15.0 || 16.0 || 19.2 || 15.8
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 730 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 498 || 469 || 320 || ~14 || ~14
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 298 || < 320 || < 360 || > 312
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.''

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|MG FF (20 mm)|MG 17 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 2 x 20 mm MG FF cannons, wing-mounted (60 rpg = 120 total)
- 2 x 7.92 mm MG 17 machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

== Usage in battles ==
''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".''

'''Pros:'''

-

'''Cons:'''

-

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Heinkel He 112 B-2/U-2 single-engine front-line fighter, 1939 series

He 112 B-2/U-2 fighters were fitted with Junkers Jumo 210 Ga fuel-injected engines. The only external difference in this variant was the modified shape of the engine side cowlings, due to individual exhaust pipes being installed instead of a general exhaust manifold.

Most production machines had lugs fastened under the centre wing section, from which six aerial fragmentation bombs could be suspended.

As a result of the He 112B's tests, the Romanians decided to reassign their Heinkels as ground-attack fighters, as had happened during the Spanish Civil War. The plane's relatively powerful armament favoured that decision, too. He 112Bs began the war with the Soviet Union as ground-attack aircraft. At that time, 28 combat-capable He 112Bs remained in service with the Romanian Air Force.

All of them were quite extensively used in the combat operations in the south of the Eastern Front in Moldavia and Ukraine from June to September 1941. According to official data, it was the He 112Bs that gained the first two air victories of the Romanian Air Force in World War II.

The combat service of He 112Bs with the Romanian Air Force was complete by September 1942. Those machines that had survived became training planes. The last of the Romanian Heinkels was discarded in 1947.

Romanian pilots did not rate the He 112B highly as a combat aircraft, which can be partially explained by the specifics of its combat assignments. The planes were without armour and fuel tank covers and yet had to assault ground targets. As a result, they took heavy losses.

The situation was aggravated by the high vulnerability of the planes' liquid-cooled engines, plus the installation of fuel tanks in the wings, which increased the chances of them being hit by ground fire. When air duels took place, Heinkels proved themselves roughly equal to the Soviet fighters, but it should be kept in mind that their opponents were the extremely obsolescent I-16s.

In summary, it can be said that the He 112 was far from the worst combat fighter of its time, but selecting the Messerschmitt Bf 109 as the Luftwaffe's main fighter was the right decision. The Heinkel He 112 played a walk-on part but remained forever in the shadow of its more successful rival.

A combined total of 68 He 112s were built, including all variants.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=he_112b_2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

- ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
- ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==

<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

- [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/71231-heinkel-he-112-b-2/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Heinkel}}
{{Germany fighters}}
{{Germany premium aircraft}}
