{{About
| about = Soviet fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = the other version
| link = I-185 (M-71)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=i_185_m82
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.37]].

The I-185 is best described as a Soviet equivalent to a [[Fw 190 (Family)|Fw 190]], as its roll rate, climb rate, and dive acceleration are closely tailored to be used with Boom & Zoom tactics. However, like many of the Yaks, it has no "great" distinguishing qualities and, although it is a great energy fighter, leans towards more of a jack-of-all-trades role. Like most Soviet fighters, it has relatively poor high-altitude performance, even if it has a higher usable ceiling than Yak fighters.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,470 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 586 || 567 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 23.2 || 24.0 || 13.9 || 13.9 || rowspan="2" | 358
|-
! Upgraded
| 645 || 615 || 20.9 || 22.0 || 24.9 || 18.5
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 800 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 380 || 354 || 280 || ~14 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 400 || < 250 || < 500 || > 350
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- 8 mm Steel - Armour plating behind the pilot seat
- No armoured glass
- Critical components located in front of aircraft (fuel, pilot, engine, controls)
- More fuel tanks located in wings near the fuselage

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|ShVAK (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 3 x 20 mm ShVAK cannons, nose-mounted (250 rpg top + 140 rpg left + 170 rpg right = 560 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}

<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|RS-82|RBS-82}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

- Without load
- 2 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (200 kg total)
- 4 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (400 kg total)
- 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (500 kg total)
- 8 x RS-82 rockets
- 8 x RBS-82 rockets

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

Climb to 4-5,000 m (13,123-16,404 ft) and attempt to eliminate most opposition; avoid superior enemies such as the Bf 109 G/F or Spitfire Mk Vc/F Mk IXs.

The '''{{PAGENAME}}''' excels at Boom & Zoom, however, is extremely lacking when it comes to turn-fighting, as it will usually end tragically. If desperate, try rolling scissors, as it can be extremely useful due to the high roll rate, and the unique '''leading-edge slats''' give extra lift at low speeds. The visibility in the I-185 is relatively poor due to the low lying cockpit and "blind back"; therefore, always watch your tail in SB.
Due to the high fire rate, you should always watch your ammo count. As a matter of fact, it is recommended to activate the "show ammo count" option in the "Interface" tab in the WT options, no matter what your plane. The nose-mounted armament can be extremely accurate due to the lack of spread. However, this can be a disadvantage as the lack of spread can mean a lack of hits for more inexperienced players in War Thunder. Additionally, the ShVAKs tend to spark quite a LOT, so players should always aim for the weakest parts of all planes.
Make sure to attack from an angle when using the ShVAKs; attack from a close range as well. The armament is most effective at about 400 to 500 m (0.25-0.31 mi).

====Specific enemies worth noting====

<!--Some concerning vehicles to worry about if playing this plane. (i.e. Japanese fighters will out turn you)-->

Two of the most common enemies of the I-185 are the Bf 109 F and Fw 190 A. The Bf 109 will outturn you, as might the Fw 190 A-1. The more heavily armed A-4 is less agile but packs a far bigger punch. The German Minengeschoß shells will easily destroy you, making the relatively lightly armed Bf 109 a huge threat already, regardless of the optional gun pods.
If you are unlucky, however, you might bump into the Fw 190 A-5 and Bf 109 G-2. The A-5 should be treated similarly to the A-4. Its clear weaknesses can be exploited easily. The Bf 109 G-2 is much faster than you, climbs better and is more agile. Even if it carries gun pods, which are more effective than the ones the F-4 has, it still hugely outperforms you and has roughly the same armament, once again sporting the fearsome Minengeschoß. Stay away from those. They easily rip your wings off, knock out your pilot, or set you on fire, often at the same time.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Good armament
- All armaments are located in the nose
- Good roll rate
- Great climb rate and acceleration when spaded
- Relatively small- low profile
- Good Boom & Zoom capability
- Fairly good elevator when compared to Fw 190 line
- Leading edge slats provide extra lift in manoeuvres

'''Cons:'''

- Cannons all have different ammo amounts
- Lack of cannon spread
- Poor plane durability - a few hits (especially from German and American cannons) can tear off a wing (or the tail)
- Poor turn rate
- Nose mounted armament can be hard to use for beginners due to the lack of spread
- Mediocre stock belts and terrible upgraded belts.
- Is only "decent" under ~4.5 km altitude

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
A single-seat cantilever monoplane with a closed cockpit and retractable landing gear with a tail wheel.

The first prototype flight took place on 21 June 1941. Only two of these fighters were built, with another rebuilt from the fourth I-185 prototype with the M-71 engine.

The plane was powered by the 18-cylinder twin-row air-cooled Shvetsov M-82A radial engine with a rated output of 1,390 hp (maximum power in emergency mode – 1,600 hp). It had the three-blade variable-pitch AV-5-119 metal propeller.

The fuel system included three fuel tanks: two in the central wing section and one in the fuselage. It used 4B-78 aviation fuel with an octane rating of no lower than 95. A single conduit in the bottom of the fuselage housed two oil coolers.

The airplane possessed three 20 mm synchronized Shpitalny-Vladimirov ShVAK autocannons. Tests were carried out on the I-185/M-82A with an ammunition complement of 500, 510 and 520 shells.

Four bomb racks were installed under the wing. They could carry four bombs of up to 100 kg or two of up to 250 kg. In addition, the design allowed the suspension of eight RS-82 rockets under the wing.

The two I-185/М-82А prototypes underwent practical testing in combat operations on the Kalinin front in the winter of 1942, and earned glowing recommendations from front-line pilots. The I-185's first combat flight took place on 9 December 1942, and its last on 12 January 1943.

The I-185/M-82A turned out to be a very reliable aircraft. Its engine didn't present any nasty surprises, and its maximum speed when it underwent state testing was only 15 km/h lower than that of the I-185/M-71. Its powerful armament also worked perfectly. Experts believed that this very plane could have been the prototype for a series of fighters. Nonetheless, the plane did not go into active service or series production.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=i_185_m82 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|vL3g8koBZlk|'''Realistic: I-185 (M-82) [Magnificent!]''' - ''Jengar''|DcJgmM54f-k|'''Review: I-185 (M-82)'''  - ''War Thunder Official Channel''}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

- ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
- ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==

<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

- [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/86510-polikarpov-i-185-m-82/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Polikarpov}}
{{USSR fighters}}
