{{About
| about= premium strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage= other variants
| link= IL-2 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=il_2_1942_luftwaffe
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} German strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.51 "Cold Steel"]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

The aircraft has an inadequate engine and cooling system, and as such, is slow and has a tendency to try to hit the ground. Air speed bleeds off easily, and climbing is close to impossible.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 2,500 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 406 || 390 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 25.9 || 26.7 || 6.2 || 6.2 || rowspan="2" | 450
|-
! Upgraded
| 445 || 423 || 24.1 || 25.0 || 10.8 || 8.3
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || X || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || N/A || 270 || ~15 || ~15
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 320 || < 320 || < 370 || > 360
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->
Known as the "flying tank" during the Second World War, the IL-2 has a steel "armoured bathtub" around the cockpit and engine, with an average thickness of between 4-6 mm. Its front windscreen however is made from armoured glass, totaling 64 mm, with the side and rear windscreens offering no protection whatsoever. Behind the cockpit is a 12 mm section of steel armour.

German ace Erich Hartmann recalled "a Shturmovik IL-2, which was the toughest aircraft to bring down because of the heavy armour plate. You had to shoot out the oil cooler underneath, otherwise, it would not go down". Receiving damage to your oil or water coolers is usually fatal, as it will cause your engine to under-perform and eventually cause your demise. The tail area is especially weak, and can be ripped off by enemy fire. The aircraft's engine is inadequate, as is the cooling system; as such, using WEP with this aircraft is not recommended.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|VYa-23 (23 mm)|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 23 mm VYa-23 cannons, wing-mounted (150 rpg = 300 total)
* 2 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine guns, wing-mounted (750 rpg = 1,500 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 4 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (200 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (500 kg total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
In Air RB, this aircraft can devastate entire columns of enemy tanks and soft targets with ease. The plane's 23 mm cannons' armour-piercing rounds will make easy work of enemy medium tanks when attacking from the sides, and can sometimes from the rear, though this seems to take more ammunition. It's recommended to use bursts when dealing with enemy armour. This aircraft can also excel in head-on attacks against enemy fighters, if needed for defensive actions. If using this plane with a squad of German IL-2s, one could potentially form a makeshift "circle of death", with each plane circling while covering the squad-mate ahead of them. If being attacked from behind, reducing power and flying low to the ground may cause the enemy fighter to overshoot into the player's firing zone.

The main threats to the IL-2 are enemy AAA and SPAA weapons, the occasional Allied attacker (A-36) and once they've arrived, enemy fighters. Most of the time the IL-2 can win a head-on with enemy fighters, however once an enemy climbs, usually the IL-2 player is doomed.

'''Enemies worth noting:'''

[[Yak-2 KABB]] - Do not think that the {{PAGENAME}} can confidently outmanoeuvre this plane just because it is twin-engined. The Yak-2 has an amazing turn rate for a heavy fighter, thus the {{PAGENAME}} must avoid turning with it, if not dogfighting with it in general. It bears a pair of ShVAK cannons that can easily damage vital parts like engine or cooling systems. It has green camo, greatly resembling an Me 410 but with an H-tail like a Bf 110's.

[[ZSD63]] - A dangerous SPAA to go up against in Tank Realistic Battles. Though it is hard to identify specific SPAA vehicles on the ground (especially when they are shooting tracers at the plane), if a ZSD63 is identified, avoid it at all costs and do not attempt head-ons with it, ever. It can easily snap a wing off by casually putting a short burst in the {{PAGENAME}}'s flight path. Don't even get close to it unless the {{PAGENAME}} has a bomb. Even ground target belts on your cannons cannot effectively damage it as its hull is overall quite empty, causing your shells to do little to no damage. Some identifying features of the ZSD63 is its rather boxy and tall hull with a geometric turret sitting at the back, slightly similar to a Wirbelwind's. The firing manner is also distinctive: the sound and green tracers are very rapid, much like a buzz saw, but then it will remain silent for half a minute reloading. Note that an experienced ZSD player will hold its fire or shoot in single salvos with long halts between, making it look like that it's reloading.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Impressive armament, providing significant firepower against a wide range of targets.
* Offers premium rewards, allowing for enhanced progression and benefits.
* Engine and cockpit are protected by armor, increasing survivability in combat.
* Capable of serving as a makeshift fighter, provided the enemy doesn't gain altitude advantage.
* 23 mm cannons equipped with armored target belts can effectively penetrate most light tanks, medium tanks, and self-propelled anti-aircraft guns (SPAA) at its battle rating.
* Ample ammunition supply ensures sustained engagement capability.

'''Cons:'''

* Lacks defensive armament, making it vulnerable to enemy attacks
* Engine and cooling systems are inadequate, impacting overall performance
* Stalling occurs at a speed of 170 km/h (105 mph), resulting in accidental stalls being common without careful maneuvering to avoid such situations
* While the frontal part of the aircraft is armored, the tail remains susceptible to damage
* Does not offer rocket payloads, limiting its versatility in ground attacks
* Adjusting to bombing without dive brakes or a bombsight may require additional practice and adaptation
* Limited rear visibility in the cockpit, particularly crucial in Simulator battles, affecting both visibility and survivability
* Only three available payload options, significantly fewer than the 23 options available on the Russian version

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
{{main|IL-2 (1942)#History}}

This particular IL-2 (1942) was originally marked as Red/White 4 of the Soviet Air Force and was captured by the Germans on the Eastern Front. The aircraft's paint scheme suggests it was most likely built at Zavod 18, as it is typical of paint schemes from this particular factory. All weapons were removed (and later reinstalled) and all markings were painted over, with the addition of a yellow band painted in front of the tail section and under the tips of the wings. Of note is the lack of the inclined Swastika which was present on the original.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=il_2_1942_luftwaffe Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Images
<gallery mode="packed-hover" heights="150">
File:The German IL-2 in flight.jpg
File:IL-2 (1942) (Germany) In hangar.png|<small>IL-2 (1942) (Germany) in hangar with bombs</small>
</gallery>

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

* [[IL-2 (1941)]]
* [[IL-2 (1942)]]

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/195737-ilyushin-il-2-1942/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [[wikipedia:Ilyushin_IL-2|Ilyushin IL-2]]
* [http://massimotessitori.altervista.org/sovietwarplanes/pages/il-2/il2-camo/germans/germans.html <nowiki>[massimotessitori.altervista.org]</nowiki> Axis remarked Il-2s]

{{AirManufacturer Ilyushin}}
{{Germany strike aircraft}}
{{Germany premium aircraft}}