{{Specs-Card
|code=mig-17_china
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' (known in Chinese client as MiG-17 米格-17) represented the batches of MiG-17 brought from Soviet Union before they were locally produced as J-5 (歼-5). As part of the 156 Key Projects, Soviet Union confirmed to license MiG-17 to Factory 112 (SAC) in 1953; the complete technical drawings, 2 MiG-17, 15 CKD kits and parts for around 10 jets were then delivered to Mainland China in 1955. The first of these jets took off to the skies in 1956/7/19 as the first jet Mainland China has assembled and soon joined PLAAF with some victories over ROCAF during the heat of Taiwan Strait Crisis. While it soon became the very first prey of AIM-9B on 1958/9/24 with Wang Zizhong (王自重) becoming the very first victim of AAM in combat history, MiG-17 and J-5 still served PLAAF humbly for more than 4 decades before later jets like J-6/7/8 eventually replaced them alongside with the MiG-15bis still in PLAAF service. Some of these jets were also aided to [[Shenyang F-5|North Korea]], Viet Cong and Albania etc., with KPAAF being the only known user up to this date.

Introduced in [[Update 1.91 "Night Vision"]] alongside with the Chinese tech-tree, the "J-4" a Chinese version of the [[MiG-17]] and performs identically to it. Although it looks very similar to MiG-15 series, the more powerful engine, extra pair of wing fence and higher swept angle for the wing gives away the identity of J-4; while the jet will be in trouble if enemy jets come with AAMs like [[AIM-9B Sidewinder|AIM-9B]] or [[R-3S]] and players didn't aware of their existence, but having high situation awareness to the battlefield and utilizing the airframe at lower air speeds (the control column is not design for speeds above 900 km/h) in dogfights will make sure most enemy jets face their end rather soon with the devastating firepower onboard; alternatively taking J-4 as a makeshift attacker is viable but requires extensive trainings to get used to the characteristics of the ground-attacking armaments. 

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 2,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 1,091 || 1,061 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 22.2 || 23.2 || 41.2 || 39.1 || rowspan="2" | 475
|-
! Upgraded
| 1,128 || 1,114 || 21.2 || 21.5 || 59.9 || 50.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 1,150 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || - || 598 || 450 || ~12 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 600 || < 700 || < 750 || -
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="4" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="2" | {{Annotation|Basic mass|Mass of the aircraft with pilot and engine oil, but no fuel or weapons load}} || colspan="2" | Wing loading (full fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | Klimov VK-1 || 1
| colspan="2" | 3,958 kg || colspan="2" | 227 kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="3" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load) || rowspan="2" | Max Takeoff<br>Weight
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! 8m fuel || 20m fuel || 29m fuel
|-
| 872 kg || colspan="2" | Centrifugal-flow turbojet
| 4,310 kg || 4,755 kg || 5,130 kg || 5,485 kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB/SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="4" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (100%)
|-
! Condition || 100% || WEP
! 8m fuel || 20m fuel || 29m fuel || MTOW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || 2,450 kgf || -
| 0.57 || 0.52 || 0.48 || 0.45
|-
| ''Optimal'' || 2,450 kgf<br>(0 km/h) || -
| 0.57 || 0.52 || 0.48 || 0.45
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 60 mm Bulletproof glass in cockpit front.
* 16 mm Steel plates behind the pilot.
* 10 mm Steel plate in the nose.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|N-37D (37 mm)|NR-23 (23 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 37 mm N-37D cannon, chin-mounted (40 rpg)
* 2 x 23 mm NR-23 cannons, chin-mounted (80 rpg = 160 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|OFAB-250sv (250 kg)|S-5K|S-5M|S-21}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 2 x 250 kg OFAB-250sv bombs (500 kg total)
* 16 x S-5K rockets
* 16 x S-5M rockets
* 2 x S-21 rockets

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The newly gained top speed performance and manoeuvrability come at a hefty price. Turn rate and low speed flexibility are reduced, due the stronger swept wing design and weight gain.

Acceleration also takes a hit, especially on take-off the predecessor will rush ahead.

As some positive characteristics traits of the MiG-15 vanish, some negative aspects also vanish. The newly designed tail enables far better control close to Mach 0.8 (it still lacks a flying tail though) and the roll rate also significantly improved. Manual limitation set the airframe at positive 8G, with the increased control the likelihood of over stressing your airframe is easy and a steady hand required in evasive manoeuvres.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Incredibly fast in a dive.
* Excellent climb speed, almost same as the [[J-2]]
* Very good manoeuvrability at low to medium speeds, also better manoeuvrability than its predecessor at high speed
* Excellent energy retention, but if you turn too hard, expect to lose a few hundred km/h
* Can safely reach a speed of 1,150 km/h when diving
* Unless rolling and pulling up at the same time, it's hard to break your wings in turn

'''Cons:'''

* Roll rate is not very good
* Guns are hard to aim and lead due to their relatively low muzzle velocity; small ammo capacity
* Different trajectory performances between 23 mm and 37 mm; requires experience and practice to use the weapons
* Guns tend to spark a lot (the N-37 in particular), especially with stock belts
* Poor acceleration between 800 - 1,100 km/h
* Doesn't do well in uptiers due to lack of air-to-air missiles, afterburner and radar
* Engine easily overheats, throttle management necessary
* Poor forward visibility in simulator, as a large canopy frame and the gunsight block the top and bottom

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The usage of the designation '''J-4''' is unclear, though most western observers claim it was applied to either the MiG-15 or MiG-17.  One theory suggested that J-4 was the Chinese designation of the [[MiG-15bis]], though this was later debunked when it was found that the [[J-2]] was in fact a 15bis model.  The most likely theory (and the one followed in-game) is that the designation was applied to imported Soviet-built MiG-17As, while license-built MiG-17Fs were designated [[Shenyang F-5|Shenyang J-5 (F-5)]].

The MiG-17 was purchased and used by the PLAAF during the early Cold War era. It saw service alongside the MiG-15 during the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis, fighting against the ROCAF's F-86 Sabres. The two air forces were matched fairly evenly in terms of aircraft, perhaps with performance advantage going to the MiG-17s over the Sabres, but during the course of the conflict the Sabres were upgraded to use the [[AIM-9B|AIM-9 Sidewinder]] air-to-air missile. This new weapon was used successfully to shoot down numerous Communist aircraft, starting its first combat experience on a good note. However, in late September 1958, a dud Sidewinder lodged itself in a MiG-17, which returned to base. The missile was successfully removed and eventually sent to the Soviet Union for reverse engineering. The result of this would be the very similar Vympel K-13 missile, entering service as the [[R-3S]] in 1962. The PLAAF would also license produce the K-13 as the [[PL-2]] some years later, bringing the Sidewinder into service on the other side of the Taiwan Strait.

Information is sparse on the fate of the MiG-17 afterwards. They were most likely supplanted by the domestically produced Shenyang J-5 version and eventually phased out of service upon the introduction of sufficient quantities of the superior MiG-19/[[J-6A|J-6]] and [[J-7II|J-7]].

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=mig-17_china Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[MiG-17 (Family)]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/285040-mikoyan-gurevich-mig-17/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Shenyang}}
{{China jet aircraft}}