{{Specs-Card
|code=re_2000_j20
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The J20 is a Swedish export variant of the Italian [[Re.2000 serie 1]]. The purchase of Re.2000 serie 1 aircraft was due to the US stopping the sales of any sort of military aircraft to foreign operators. Thus, Sweden acquired 60 units of the aircraft, with Hungary being the second biggest foreign operator. The J20's engine proved to be very unreliable, but it was still liked by its crew, thanks to its good flying characteristics and stable performance in Sweden's harsh conditions. During World War II, the fighter was used by fighter wing F 10 at Malmö and had the task of intercepting any aircraft that violated the neutral Swedish airspace. A single unit was shot down in 1945 intercepting a German Dornier Do 24 near Sölvesborg.

Introduced in [[Update 1.95 "Northern Wind"]], the J20 behaves exactly the same as the Italian [[Re.2000 serie 1]]. The aircraft has an amazing climb rate, outperforming many other fighters at its BR. It is a good energy fighter when it is used with its climb rate in consideration and it can also be very decent as a turn fighter thanks to its low turn time. Its biggest issue is the weak armament, only two 12.7 mm MGs and the compression at relatively medium speeds (only 400 km/h). The aircraft also has full engine controls for its use if necessary, but this is only advised for very skilled pilots.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
This plane is a carbon copy of the Italian [[Re.2000 serie 1]] in everything but the ammo belts available. Because of this, it flies like its Italian counterpart.

Its playstyle is similar to that of a turn-fighter/energy-fighter. It turns well, but not enough to counter biplanes. It can energy fight, but its energy retention is average. Acceleration in a dive slightly above average but unfortunately the rudder starts to compress at 400 km/h, and increases dramatically above 500 km/h. It is a jack-of-all-trades but master of none.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,300 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 510 || 495 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 16.8 || 17.3 || 12.8 || 12.8 || rowspan="2" | 220
|-
! Upgraded
| 550 || 529 || 15.5 || 16.0 || 20.6 || 16.2
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 457 || 428 || 280 || ~13 || ~10
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 350 || < 350 || < 380 || > 200
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! Compressor
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
! Setting 1
| 4,180 m || 1,000 hp || 1,130 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->
The J20 does not have any armour, like its counterpart, the [[Re.2000 serie 1]]. However, it does have 2 self-sealing fuel tanks underneath the pilot. Despite this, it is prone to fires, and due to the proximity of the fuel tanks to the pilot, a fire is likely to be fatal.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Akan m/40 (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 12.7 mm Akan m/40 machine guns, nose-mounted (300 rpg = 600 total)

Akan m/40 was the designation the Swedish gave to the Italian [[Breda-SAFAT (12.7 mm)|12.7 mm Breda-SAFAT]] machine gun. Despite this, the gun lacks the incendiary belts found on the Italian planes mounted with this gun. The Tracers belt is easily the worst, as it contains only Ball ammunition with a tracer component. It is recommended to use either the Air targets or Universal belt, which are basically the same belt but with ammo types changing position on the belts.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The J20 is excellent at turnfighting. It can out-turn most contemporary aircraft. It is not recommended to fight enemies head-on due to its weak armament of 2 x 12.7 mm Akan m/40 machine guns. Boom and zoom is not a great playstyle for this aircraft as its control surfaces lock past 500 km/h. The aircraft is not equipped with any suspended armaments, which makes it unfit to attack ground targets.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Great climb rate (20+ m/s)
* Great at energy fighting
* Good acceleration (capable of 700 km/h (435 mph) in a dive)
* Good turn rate, amazing at 400 to 500 km/h (248 to 310 mph)
* Full manual engine control + propeller feathering

'''Cons:'''

* Average speed (450 IAS)
* Average roll rate at any speed
* Underwhelming performance of the 2 x 12.7 mm Akan m/40 machine guns
* Low ammunition count for machine guns (only 600 rounds total)
* Overheats easily, even with 100% radiators, can only WEP for a few seconds before the engine overheats and destroys itself
* Sensitive to battle damage (damage will usually result in the aircraft catching fire)

== History ==
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=re_2000_j20 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[Re.2000 (Family)]]

== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/402763-re-2000-int/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Reggiane}}
{{Sweden fighters}}