{{Specs-Card
|code=ju-188a-2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The [[Ju 88 (Family)|Ju 88]] was one of Junkers' proposals for the Schnellbomber (high-speed bomber) program. It featured a unique airframe design and had relatively low drag compared to other bomber designs. Over the years, the Ju 88 went through multiple revisions and variants, such as the Ju 88 A-4. In 1939, the RLM issued a specification for a new line of Schnellbombers. Junkers submitted the Ju 88 B, which was an [[Ju 88 A-1|A-1]] airframe fitted with much more powerful engines. Although the performance left much to be desired, work continued.

Junkers also submitted the Ju 288 for RLM's new requirement, but it became clear to both Junkers and RLM that it wouldn't be ready any time in the near future. RLM was essentially left with no choice but to accept whatever performance gains the Ju 88 B had against the growing Soviet and British air forces. The numerous upgrades led to the Ju 188, which was heavily upgraded over the original Ju 88. It featured more defensive armament and airframe changes. Part of the RLM's requirement also stated that the new bomber had to be capable of mounting the BMW 801 radial engine. The Ju 188 A's were fitted with the Jumo 213 engine, while the Ju 188 E variant was fitted with the BMW 801 engine.

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was introduced in [[Update 1.97 "Viking Fury"]]. Although it was intended to be a light bomber that could hit high speeds, the Ju 188 still has very respectable bomb loadouts, with one loadout consisting of up to 3,000 kg of bombs. However, although the 188 is classified as a bomber, it lacks a bombsight. The Ju 188 A-2 has a structural limit of 675 km/h (419 mph), so players can quickly dive to enemy bases to accurately drop bombs. As for defensive armament, the Ju 188 A-2 comes with five turrets, ranging from 7.92 mm machine guns to 20 mm cannons.
== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 495 || 477 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 33.4 || 34.5 || 5.4 || 5.4 || rowspan="2" | 750
|-
! Upgraded
| 547 || 520 || 30.7 || 32.0 || 11.3 || 8.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 457 || 428 || 280 || ~12 || ~9
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 370 || < 360 || < 450 || > 290
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 5 mm steel in front of rearmost dorsal gunner*
* 6 mm steel on top of dorsal gun ammo
* 6 mm steel under and in front of ventral gunner*
* 6 mm steel around turret ring of dorsal gunner**
* 6 mm steel in front of dorsal gunner
* 6 mm steel in front of dorsal gunner's face
* 6 mm steel behind base of pilot's seat
* 8 mm steel - pilot's seat
* 60 mm bulletproof glass in front of rearmost dorsal gunner*
* Self-sealing fuel tanks (1 in central fuselage, 2 in each wing)

<nowiki>*</nowiki>Note that the gunner is rear-facing.

<nowiki>**</nowiki>The "dorsal gunner" and not the "rearmost dorsal gunner" is the one closer to the pilot.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|SC50JA (50 kg)|SC250JA (250 kg)|SC500K (500 kg)|SC1000L2 (1,000 kg)|SC1800B (1,800 kg)}}
{{main|PC500 (500 kg)|PC1000 (1,000 kg)|PC1600 (1,600 kg)|Flam C 250 incendiary|Flam C 500 incendiary}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 10 x 50 kg SC50JA bombs (500 kg total)
* 6 x 250 kg SC250JA bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 2 x 500 kg SC500K bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg SC1000L2 bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 1 x 1,800 kg SC1800B bomb (1,800 kg total)
* 6 x Flam C 250 incendiary bombs
* 2 x Flam C 500 incendiary bombs
* 2 x 500 kg PC500 bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg PC1000 bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 1 x 1,600 kg PC1600 bomb + 1 x 1,000 kg PC1000 bomb (2,600 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (20 mm)|MG 131 (13 mm)|MG 81 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, nose turret (250 rpg)
* 1 x 20 mm MG 151 cannon, top dorsal turret (250 rpg)
* 1 x 13 mm MG 131 machine gun, lower dorsal turret (500 rpg)
* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 81 machine guns, ventral turret (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
While utilising a stock version of the aircraft, choosing the option to use the 50SC x 10 payload performs best for when rushing ground troops, of course, when possible, drop them more on one target. As soon as you have better payload options, you also have the opportunity to go for bases.

At the beginning of the match, you should always go into a shallow dive to maximise your speed, and by that the chance to get to your target before anybody else, and cover the underside of the plane by simply flying close to the ground. Your 20 mm cannon on top of the the canopy is deadly, and as soon as you have the universal belt unlocked, you can shoot down multiple enemy fighters before going down yourself. However, try to avoid head-ons because of your glass cockpit and mind that your 20mm can't fire directly behind the plane because the rudder blocks it.

If you have all loadouts unlocked, the one with the 2x1000kg, 2x250kg and 10x50kg is the best for destroying bases. The 2x250kg drop at the same time from your wingtips and with one 1000kg bomb, the other 11 bombs are enough for a second base in Arcade mode. In Realistic mode, it is advised to open the bomb door before reaching the target, and to tap the bomb key 4 times to drop the appropriate number of bombs. This will guarantee the destruction of one base, and leave you with a total of nine 50 kg that can then be used for ground striking or to possibly damage another base. This is also the loadout with the most payload so you should use it for the airfields as well. Concerning ground targets, you can use the loadout you prefer, just make sure you have 3 bomb drops before you get to the 50 kg bombs in the bomb bay.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Fast bomber, faster than the Do 217 series
* Manoeuvrable, even better with empty payload when returning to base
* Versatile payload options with 3,000 kg of maximum payload
* Defensive armament is an upgrade from the Do 217 series
* Durable, can survive hits that might down other bombers of similar size
* Rear gunners are protected by several armour plates
* Top 20 mm turret has a full circle traverse
* Powerful engines
* Fast-deploying landing gear
* WEP can be used for long periods of time

'''Cons:'''

* Doesn't have the ability to dive bomb accurately
* No armour from the front
* Abysmal stock payload

== History ==
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=ju-188a-2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|XNOyL9mH9yE|'''Ju-188 A-2 Spade Review. Good, but not worth a 5.3 BR''' - ''Joseph 2000''|SJGTWZTO8o8|'''Ju 188 A-2 - Update 1.97 Dev Server''' - ''TheEuropeanCanadian''}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/479239-ju-188a-2/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Junkers}}
{{Germany bombers}}