{{About
| about = German strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Ju 87 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=ju-87g_2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27. The flight model is identical to the G-1 with similar values to the Ju 87 D series. The differences between the G-1 and the G-2 is that the G-1 has the wing of the D-3 while the G-2 has the same wing area as the Ju 87 D-5 variant.

Regarded highly by famed German ace Hans-Ulrich Rudel, the Ju 87 G is one of the deadliest ground attack aircraft in War Thunder. Building upon the classic "Stuka" design, German engineers fitted a pair of Bordkanone 37 mm cannons to early Ju 87 D models, creating a beast. Instead of bombs, this aircraft utilizes its twin synchronized 37 mm anti-tank cannons to demolish any armour it faces. Able to fire the German 37 mm high-velocity armour piercing round, the Ju 87 G is more than a force to be reckoned with. Unfortunately, each cannon only holds 12 rounds of ammunition each, for a total of 12 individual shots. This puts a cap on how much total damage the Ju 87 G can do.

The Ju 87 G's armament, a pair of Bordkanone BK 3,7 cannons, are deadly in all regards. They are able to destroy most ground units and aircraft with a single press of the trigger. Equip air targets or armoured targets belt depending on what your target is. The armoured targets belt is fairly ineffective against aircraft and the air targets belt does next to nothing to armoured ground units.

The Ju 87 G-2 differs from its earlier counterpart, the [[Ju 87 G-1]] in that it utilizes the later D model, the [[Ju 87 D-5]]. The G-1 model uses the earlier [[Ju 87 D-3]] model.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 364 || 350 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 33.5 || 35.1 || 7.2 || 7.2 || rowspan="2" | 513
|-
! Upgraded
| 401 || 380 || 30.7 || 32.0 || 12.5 || 9.5
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || 454 || 320 || ~10 || ~4
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 270 || < 350 || < 380 || > 325
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 4 mm Steel plating cockpit tub
* 4 mm Steel plating engine base
* 8 mm Steel plate behind pilot's seat
* 8 mm Steel plate headrest
* 50 mm Bulletproof glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

Unlocking the 37 mm belts is a must for this aircraft. The default belt is a mix of HE and AP rounds, resulting in only half of the trigger pull hitting what you want. Instead of staggering the rounds one trigger pull is HE one trigger pull is AP, it is mixed. After that, it does not matter which modules the Stuka pilot researches.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|BK 3.7 (37 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 37 mm BK 3.7 cannons, wing-mounted (12 rpg = 24 total)

The two 37 mm cannons are mounted in external gunpods under each wing. Each is armed with the same amount of ammunition, which means that all guns will fire with each other until empty.

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MG 81 (7.92 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 2 x 7.92 mm MG 81 machine guns, dorsal turret (850 rpg = 1,700 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Like other ground attack aircraft, the Ju 87 G is heavily armoured, tarnishing its flight characteristics. However, with enough speed, the Ju 87 G can turn on a dime. This is the case with all Ju 87 variants. Once that speed is gone, however, the Ju 87 turns painfully slowly. Mitigate this by using dive attacks to gain altitude. At higher altitudes, the Ju 87 G can be a fighter's nightmare. With enough speed and energy, a Ju 87 can outmanoeuvre most fighters. A Ju 87 G pilot's best chances of surviving an encounter are a good aim, teamwork, and speed. Boom & Zooming 10 m above the ground will make the Ju 87 G a very easy target, so one must stay at higher altitudes if they wish to survive a dogfight.

Dog-fighting isn't what the Ju 87 G was meant for after all as ground attack is the theatre in which the Ju 87 G shines. Equip the armoured targets to belt for the 37 mm cannons because it is composed entirely of high-velocity armour piercing rounds, perfect for destroying armour. Light pillboxes, light tanks, medium tanks, and heavy tanks are all able to be destroyed by these cannons. In order to maximize damage, come in on an attack run from behind a column of tanks, and aim at their engines. If both shells hit, no matter the tank it will always result in a kill. Make sure your gun convergence isn't set at an extreme, as it is essential for both shells to penetrate the tank's armour. The same goes for light pillboxes, to a lesser extent.

The Ju 87 G is also capable of equipping an air targets belt composed of high explosive rounds for its twin 37 mm cannons. This upgrade turns the Ju 87 into a "one-shot wonder" capable of destroying any aircraft in a single hit. This is especially deadly in arcade battles, where a lead indicator shows exactly where to aim the cannons. In realistic and simulator battles shot placement is very important as the Ju 87 G has very limited ammunition.

Equip armour piercing shell rack to effectively destroy all brands of tanks. Keep speeds at 250-300 km/h (IAS) for good manoeuvrability

This plane is mainly used for killing tanks. When hunting tanks, equip armour piercing shell rack and do not lead your shots. Aim straight at the front end of the tank and it should hit. When hunting for bombers, only engage if they are lower than you and not heavily armed like the B-17s. It is important to note that this aircraft is an easy target for fighters and so it is recommended to stick close to allies and stay around them for a while until the bandit numbers have thinned out. When you feel you are safe from any harassment then only engage the ground units. You may engage ground units if you have cover or you feel that bandits are already engaged. You have limited ammo so make it count! This is a fun aircraft to fly and should give you practice to flying the Hs 129.

Because of their low speed, permanent landing gear and reasonable durability, all the Ju 87 are quite good for capturing airfields in the Airfield Domination mode.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Impressive turn rate at high speeds
* Powerful cannons
* Good defensive turret
* Armour around the pilot, gunner and engine
* Able to be used in different roles (attacker, support fighter, etc.)

'''Cons:'''

* Meagre cannon ammo at only 24 rounds total
* Very slow
* Vulnerable to damage
* Incredibly lacklustre roll rate, especially at high speeds
* Bad high altitude performance
* Inability to equip bombs or rockets
* Not suited for sustained turn fights
* Poor energy retention

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
By 1942, the need for a new ground attack aircraft was ever present. The ageing Ju 87 was proving to be obsolete, and the new Henschel Hs 129 was underpowered and ill-protected. Hans-Ulrich Rudel, a Stuka ace, proposed a pair of 37 mm cannons be added to a Ju 87 D. Thus, the "Kanonenvogel" or "cannon-bird" was born. The Ju 87 G was most famously piloted by Rudel himself, who destroyed a countless amount of Soviet tanks and equipment.

Hans-Ulrich Rudel was the only person to be awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Golden Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds, one of Germany's highest awards. The highest-scoring ace of World War II, Erich Hartmann, also held the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds – but his Oak Leaves were not gold.

Rudel survived the war and later, pulling from personal experiences, Rudel's input was used to design and develop the current day A-10 Thunderbolt attack aircraft.

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
The Junkers Ju 87 Stuka was a single-engine dive bomber and attack aircraft of the WWII era. The most famous Stuka pilot of the war was Hans-Ulrich Rudel, the most highly decorated Luftwaffe pilot in history. Despite its slow speed and mediocre aerodynamics (the landing gear was fixed), the Stuka was one of the most effective Luftwaffe aircraft early in the war due to its pin-point accuracy in a dive. The Ju 87 remains one of the most recognizable symbols of the Blitzkrieg.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=ju-87g_2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|owYlJZ4LgyA|'''The Shooting Range #36''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 06:02 discusses the Ju 87 Stuka.}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

* [[Ju 87 G-1]]
* [[Tempest Mk V (Vickers P)]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/161913-junkers-ju-87-g-2/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [[wikipedia:Junkers_Ju_87#Ju_87G|[Wikipedia] Junkers Ju 87G]]

{{AirManufacturer Junkers}}
{{Germany strike aircraft}}