{{Specs-Card
|code=ki_108
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
|cockpit=cockpit_ki_108.jpg
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was a Japanese twin-engine heavy fighter/interceptor prototype developed from the [[Ki-96]] and [[Ki-102 otsu|Ki-102]] models. It was designed to counter the high-altitude American bombers such as the [[B-29A-BN|B-29 Superfortress]]. It had a pressurized cockpit, a 37 mm nose cannon and two 20 mm chin cannons. It was powered by two Mitsubishi Ha-112-II Ru turbosupercharged radials. Only four Ki-108s were built and none saw combat before the end of the war.

It was introduced in [[Update 1.77 "Advancing Storm"]]. The Ki-108 is a formidable heavy fighter that boasts strong armament, respectable climb performance, and reasonable maneuverability. Its main drawback is its vulnerable engine that can be crippled by enemy fire. The optimal strategy for this plane is to intercept bombers from the front or side and evade their rear gunners. The plane can also handle fighters that are lower than it, but it should not challenge them on equal footing, as it lacks dogfighting and escape capabilities. The plane should climb to the side of the map and have friendly cover above it. If the plane faces enemy fighters at high altitude without allies, it should be cautious and strike when they are unsuspecting.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 8,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 597 || 580 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 22.1 || 22.9 || 8.4 || 8.4 || rowspan="2" | 600
|-
! Upgraded
| 649 || 622 || 20.4 || 21.0 || 16.9 || 12.1
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 762 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 408 || 260 || ~10 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 360 || < 400 || < 400 || > 312
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 12 mm Steel - Pilot's headrest
* 12 mm Steel - Pilot's backrest

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Ho-204 (37 mm)|Ho-5 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 37 mm Ho-204 cannon, nose-mounted (35 rpg)
* 2 x 20 mm Ho-5 cannons, chin-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The Ki-108's assets are its excellent guns (especially the 37 mm Ho-204 with its quick rate of fire; the 20 mm are unimpressive but will give you a chance to finish a wounded enemy), its climbing speed, and its fairly good manoeuvrability for a plane with so much firepower. Its main weakness is its engine vulnerability. Use the climb rate and speed to engage bombers from the front or front-side, down or cripple, disengage to reload, climb back and repeat. Do not engage bombers from behind as even a [[B-18A]] or [[B-34]] has a good chance of crippling you with its tail gunners. Fighters climbing towards you are reasonably easy prey, but try to avoid confrontations where you do not have an altitude advantage, as your dogfighting ability is low and your escape speed is unimpressive if you don't start with a strong advantage.

In Air AB, it's best to side climb, as even when fully upgraded, the Ki-108 will not outclimb aircraft such as the [[Bf 109 F-4]]. The Ki-108 performs best when there are teammates above you to provide you with cover - if you find yourself alone at high altitude against single-engine enemy fighters, you'll have to be very wary of them and take them out when they least expect it - a Ki-108 probably won't beat something like a Bf 109 F-4 in a 1 v 1 engagement unless it comes in with an element of surprise or a significant altitude or speed advantage.

Overall, a fantastic interceptor at its battle rating, good enough to regularly score Survivor awards.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Powerful armaments
* Decent climb rate

'''Cons:'''

* Serious overheating issues even without WEP
* The 37 mm are inaccurate even once upgraded
* Low ammo counts; require trigger discipline
* Poor roll rates at low and high speeds
* Highly flammable
* Absolutely awful cockpit visibility 

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
Development of the Ki-108 began in April 1943 after Kawasaki wanted to fulfil a standing requirement with the Japanese Army for a heavy interceptor that initially began with the Ki-45 heavy fighter series. The Ki-108's design was derived mostly from the previous Ki-102 project and took some elements of the Ki-96 as well, effectively combining the two designs into one. After the first B-29 Superfortress bombers made their appearance over the Japanese home islands, the need for such a high-altitude interceptor became even more emphasized. Two Ki-102 otsu airframes were taken from the assembly line in 1944 to produce the initial Ki-108 prototypes. Compared to the Ki-102, which was intended as a low-altitude attack aircraft, the Ki-108 was an interceptor meant for high altitude operations. To allow for this, the Ki-108's cockpit had to be significantly reduced in size and was to be hermetically sealed. This effectively turned the Ki-108 into a single-seater, reduced weight and decreased the strain on the engines all at the same time, which allowed for better performance at higher altitudes.

The two initial prototypes were completed in July and August 1944, respectively. An improved version of the Ki-108 was designed based around the Ki-102 Hei, featuring a wider wingspan and a longer fuselage, in an effort to improve high-altitude handling. Two examples of the Ki-108 Kai variant were built and subsequently tested in 1945. However, the worsening war situation for Japan prematurely concluded testing of the type and both versions never left prototype stage, yet alone seeing combat. A total of four Ki-108s were manufactured between 1944 - 1945.

''- From [[wt:en/news/5365-development-kawasaki-ki-108-the-final-dragon-slayer-en|Devblog]]''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=ki_108 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

* [[Ki-96]]
* [[Ki-102 otsu]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/5365-development-kawasaki-ki-108-the-final-dragon-slayer-en|[Devblog] Kawasaki Ki-108: The Final Dragon Slayer]]
* [https://www.militaryfactory.com/aircraft/detail.asp?aircraft_id=1478 Military Factory - Kawasaki Ki-108]
* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/402765-ki-108/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Kawasaki}}
{{Japan twin-engine fighters and strike aircraft}}