{{Specs-Card
|code=ki-96
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was a twin-engined heavy fighter developed by Kawasaki as a private venture in 1942 after the success of their [[Ki-45 (Family)|Ki-45 line]]. Like the Ki-45, it was a two-seat, twin-engined fighter with larger and more powerful Ha-112 radial engines to replace the Ki-45's Ha-104 engines. However, as the Japanese Army showed interest in the plane, they requested the plane as a single-seat interceptor, which resulted in two of the three prototypes being built with a smaller cockpit canopy, leaving the first with a two-seat-sized canopy for a single seat. The Ki-96 demonstrated excellent performance and handling, exceeding the estimates, but the Army changed its requirements back to a two-seat fighter, so the project was cancelled. The wings and tail unit of the Ki-96 were used for the [[Ki-102 otsu|Ki-102]] two-seat fighter. The Ki-96 was armed with one 37 mm Ho-203 cannon and two 20 mm Ho-5 cannons mounted in its nose.

The '''Ki-96''' was introduced in [[Update 1.35]]. Based on the latter 2 prototypes (most likely No.3), it has a smaller single-seat canopy, the Ki-96 is beyond what the Army initially requested. A twin-engine single-seat interceptor-fighter with great performance and handling, it will perform its role of interceptor to its full potential in tearing apart bombers from oblique angles, and outfighting enemy fighters in Boom-N-Zoom tactics. While it's a twin-engine aircraft, it's deceivingly agile and will be capable of dogfighting with single-engine aircraft. One last thing to note is while the armament packs a punch, ammunition is relatively scarce and should be used sparingly with trigger discipline.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

The Ki-96 is a generally smooth flyer and is characterized by its powerful armament, high speed, high climb rate, interceptor spawn and relatively good turn rate. All of these traits make for a solid interceptor that can shred through bombers like a hot katana through wet bamboo.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 568 || 553 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 25.3 || 25.7 || 14.5 || 14.5 || rowspan="2" | 380
|-
! Upgraded
| 634 || 600 || 23.7 || 24.0 || 30.9 || 19.5
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 762 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 408 || 260 || ~9 || ~8
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 360 || < 400 || < 400 || > 296
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 12 mm steel plating in the nose
* 16 mm steel plating behind the pilot
* Critical components located at the front of aircraft (fuel, pilot, engine, controls)
* Self-sealing fuel tanks in the wings

For a Japanese plane, the Ki-96 has a decent survivability, with armour plate protecting pilot from head-on and tailing attacks, thought one should never rely on it as the Ki-96 lacks a bulletproof glass and therefore is vulnerable to pilot sniping.

As with any other Japanese plane, the Ki-96 is volatile and will catch fire very easily. But, unlike any other Japanese fighters, the Ki-96 is able to survive a fire damage by turning off its engine and let its effective self-sealing fuel tanks do its job.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Ho-203 (37 mm)|Ho-5 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 37 mm Ho-203 cannon, nose-mounted (25 rpg)
* 2 x 20 mm Ho-5 cannons, chin-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)

The Ki-96 is equipped with one 37 mm Ho-203 cannon and two 20 mm Ho-5 cannons mounted in its nose. The 37 mm gun has poor muzzle velocity and ammunition count, but a high rate of fire for its calibre and devastating damage output. While the 20 mm guns have a lesser damage output, they have a greater accuracy and ammunition count. Due to different gun characteristics, weapon selection should comes in handy, as you can choose between two set of guns for different situations. Use the 37 mm against slow or big targets like bombers to quickly finish them off, while the 20 mm are more useful against fast opponents and in a dogfight.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

One should fly the Ki-96 in its stated role: interceptor. When engaging bombers, be sure to approach from oblique angles and never tail one, as you have no bulletproof glass to protect your pilot from snipes. While bombers with good aim can snipe you, you can do the same to their plane in seconds when you land your devastating 37 mm cannon and 20 mm cannon shots. If all you encounter are fighters, it can make for a decent Boom-&-Zoom aircraft with its good speed, climb rate, and armament. It is good at turn-fighting as well and perhaps even one of its key strengths but should only be considered by experienced players because of its vulnerability, slow roll speed, and large wing span together with its low and heavy ammo. With these in mind, always try to engage fighters with an energy advantage, although be careful as the Ki-96's roll rate heavily stiffens above 643 km/h (400 mph), which makes it hard to control at high speeds.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Powerful offensive armament mounted in the centre of the plane
* 37 mm gun has a good rate of fire for its calibre
* Fast, quicker than most Japanese planes at the same rank
* Turns well for a twin-engined fighter
* High climb rate
* Responsive elevator allows a quick snap turns
* Can survive multiple fires with proper engine control
* 360° cockpit view

'''Cons:'''

* Wings are littered with fuel tanks
* No bulletproof glass to protect the pilot
* Flight characteristics still has some limitations:
* Still outmanoeuvred and outsped by most single-engine fighters
* Poor energy retention
* Poor roll rate at all speed, especially above 640km/h
* Cockpit visibility is hampered by a large amount of structural bars
* 37 mm cannon has relatively low muzzle velocity

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The Ki-96 was a twin-engined heavy fighter developed by Kawasaki Aeronautics in 1942 after the success of their [[Ki-45 (Family)|Ki-45]] line. Like the Ki-45, it was a two-seat, twin-engined fighter with larger and more powerful Ha-112 radial engines to replace the Ki-45's Ha-104 engines. It was intended to replace the "Toryu's" for the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service, but the Imperial Japanese Army Aviation Bureau insisted that it be converted to a single-seat fighter. The first prototype made retained the cockpit canopy intended for a two-seat fighter, and the next two prototypes were fitted with smaller canopies.

Despite showing performance exceeding estimates and having excellent handling, the Army's requirements had changed back to two-seat fighters, resulting in production and development on the Ki-96 being halted, with only three prototypes being made. However, the wings and tail unit would later go on to form the Ki-102 wings and tail.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=ki-96 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/303511-kawasaki-ki-96/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Kawasaki}}
{{Japan twin-engine fighters and attackers}}
{{Japan premium aircraft}}