{{Specs-Card
|code=la-15
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
Shortly after the end of WWII in Europe, the Soviet Union outlined the design requirements for a future fighter aircraft powered using their newfound jet technology from the Germans. As a result, many of the well-established design bureaus of the time began work on a indigenous jet fighter. Sukhoi began studies with their [[Su-9|Aircraft K]] prototype, Mikoyan began working on their [[MiG-15|I-310]] prototype, Yakovlev started the [[Yak-15]] family, and not to be left behind Lavochkin initiated '''Project 52''', a proposal for a jet powered fighter-interceptor drawing from the captured plans and designs of the German Ta-183 which was never built. Project 52 differed from the MiG-15 and later [[Yak-30D|Yak-30]], as the project was for not one, but two aircraft. These two aircraft were designated [[La-174|Aircraft 174]] and Aircraft 174D, the only difference being that 174 used the reverse engineered Rolls-Royce Derwent engine, while the latter 174D used the Rolls-Royce Nene engine. In the end, the Derwent (redesignated as the Klimov RD-500) powered prototype was chosen to enter production as the '''La-15'''. The La-15 would enter service officially in 1949 and 235 of the type would be produced, before production (and service) was cut short when it was retired quickly in 1953 due the advent of more advanced aircraft with supersonic capability, such as the new [[MiG-19 (Family)|MiG-19]] and two years later, the first prototypes of the [[MiG-21 (Family)|MiG-21]].

The '''{{Specs|name}}''', introduced in [[Update 1.39]], is a special jet that lies somewhere in the middle of the jets at its tier due to its wings being incredibly weak for the engine it possesses, allowing you to easily rip your wings in level flight. However, due to the battle rating and the speeds that jet combat is usually fought at, the La-15 can be classed as an underestimated jet, relying on the curse of its absurdly strong engine performance to best its opponents. The aircraft functions best at slow to medium speeds, where it's not going too fast and suffering from compression, but where it's slow enough to turn with its opponents or accelerate away from them quickly due to its powerful engine. Medium speed boom-and-zoom tactics are advised, with the ability to retain its energy well for a few turns when needed thanks to the great engine power. Of course, an interceptor playstyle can also be utilized, using its powerful engine to quickly climb and intercept high altitude aircraft found at its battle ratings, such as bombers and strike fighters with air spawns. When everything else fails, the La-15 possesses the strong capability of resetting the fight by simply accelerating and running away, with only a very few aircraft at its battle rating being able to catch it in a straight line. One should be very cautious when using this tactic in uptiers however, as some aircraft you can face there (such as the [[F9F-8]]) are armed with early air-to-air missiles, negating any straight line speed advantage you may have.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 3,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 999 || 969 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 24.0 || 25.2 || 25.6 || 23.8 || rowspan="2" | 650
|-
! Upgraded
| 1,037 || 1,022 || 23.2 || 23.5 || 38.5 || 31.7
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| X || ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 945 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || - || 470 || 320 || ~12 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 640 || < 535 || < 630 || -
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="5" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="2" | {{Annotation|Basic mass|Mass of the aircraft with pilot and engine oil, but no fuel or weapons load}} || colspan="3" | Wing loading (full fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | Klimov RD-500 || 1
| colspan="2" | 2,890 kg || colspan="3" | 234 kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="4" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load) || rowspan="2" | Max Takeoff<br>Weight
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! 13m fuel || 20m fuel || 30m fuel || 43m fuel
|-
| 567 kg || colspan="2" | Centrifugal-flow turbojet
| 3,160 kg || 3,304 kg || 3,512 kg || 3,790 kg || 3,870 kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB/SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="5" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (112%)
|-
! Condition || 100% || 112%
! 13m fuel || 20m fuel || 30m fuel || 43m fuel || MTOW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || 1,350 kgf || 1,499 kgf
| 0.47 || 0.45 || 0.43 || 0.40 || 0.39
|-
| ''Optimal'' || 1,350 kgf<br>(0 km/h) || 1,499 kgf<br>(0 km/h)
| 0.47 || 0.45 || 0.43 || 0.40 || 0.39
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 105 mm Bulletproof glass in cockpit front
* 8.5 mm Steel plate behind the pilot
* 6 mm Steel plate in the nose

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|NR-23 (23 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 3 x 23 mm NR-23 cannons, chin-mounted (100 rpg = 300 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The La-15 should be used in as an American Fighter when not in engagements (straight lines, absolute minimal turning to retain speed) and as a "jet-turn-fighter" when in engaged with enemy aircraft.

Here are the DON'Ts of the La-15...

# Don't climb at the beginning of the match, use the beginning of the match to fly straight forward to the enemy, as low to the ground you can get.
# Don't keep yourself on 100% throttle. Use the special 112% power that the La-15's engine gives you. The WEP, as one could call it, lasts for a long time, and when overheating, just simply turn it off for about 15 - 60 seconds, after which it can be turned on again
# Don't commit to a head-on attack or turn hard after one. Your guns are hard to aim in the heat of head-on and it would be advised to break when closing in on a head-on, or preemptively turn to get on their 6 immediately.
# Don't get into a situation where you must fly at high speeds defensively. When an enemy shows up on your tail, if you have superior speed, outrun him, however, if he has superior speed, slow down to a point in which higher G turns don't G-lock you and where you can take full advantage of an enemy fighter's higher speed to get behind them. Make them bleed their energy turning to get you while avoiding their attacks and engage your flaps when you're slow enough to deploy without ripping.

However, do the following:

# Do go straight at the beginning of the match, the La-15 still can reach a high enough speed where it can outrun planes that turn to get behind you.
# Do bring 11 - 20 minutes of fuel at maximum. You'll have enough fuel to last you a usual jet battle's time with WEP on when you need it, and you won't catch on fire. The La-15 has a lot more manoeuvrability when only 11 minutes of fuel are taken. Do keep in mind that only taking 11 minutes of fuel will result in a lower wing rip speed of around 910 km/h
# Do keep going straight after you break from a head-on attack or overshoot, you can win the acceleration battle with almost any American jet you face. You are light, as with almost all Soviet jets you are much lighter than your American counterparts and will always win a battle of low speed acceleration, but lose a battle of diving acceleration.
# Do slow down when an enemy plane that's faster than you are behind you. Most enemy planes will try to keep their speed, which puts you in a situation to pull hard turns without G-locking. If you're fast, do some light horizontal turns, but don't turn into the vertical, most American fighters will beat you at energy retention at higher speeds then have no acceleration when they stall which leads you to always be in front of their guns. If possible, keep rolling and spiraling, using your WASD keys to dodge attacks and then come out as the slower but still manoeuvrable plane when they try to dogfight you.

====Specific enemies worth noting====
<!--Some concerning vehicles to worry about if playing this plane. (i.e. Japanese fighters will out turn you)-->
[[F-86 Sabre (Family)|F-86 Sabre/CL-13A Sabre]] - The F-86 Sabre is one of the main rivals of the La-15 if up-tiered and facing allied teams. The Sabre can easily outmanoeuvre, outrun, and out climb the La-15. The best way to counter the Sabre is to attack it when it is at its most vulnerable position (low on energy, or damaged) or force it into a low-speed manoeuvring fight. Do not try to engage an F-86/CL-13A Sabre in any high-speed manoeuvres or any high-speed dogfighting in general as the Sabre will come out on top. In any low-speed manoeuvres, the Sabre will lose to the La-15 in any manoeuvring engagements.

[[Meteor (Family)|Meteors]] - The Meteor is another main rival of the La-15 as the La-15 can meet the Meteor at any time from being down-tiered to up-tiered. While the La-15 can outrun and out climb early variants of the Meteors, the later variants are far harder to outrun and outclimb as they can easily catch the La-15. The best way to deal with Meteors is to apply boom and zoom tactics, but do remember a skilled Meteor pilot will have no issue avoiding a La-15 that is attacking with boom and zoom tactics. Avoid any manoeuvring fights with any variant of the Meteor as they will outmanoeuvre you with no issues at all.

====Counter-tactics====
<!--What to expect, if it would be in command of the enemy and how to counter it. (i.e. They will most likely BnZ, etc.)-->
The La-15 has, at best, a speed limit of 1,000 km/h. Be aware of this and, if possible, try to out dive or outrun the La-15, as it can break its wings easily in a dive and in level flight. Its airbrake is ineffective in a hard dive unless the engine is turned off, so turn on an afterburner and keep it on until you have gotten into level flight.
If you are slower than the La-15, Do not try to climb, break, or use an airbrake, the La-15 has very good energy retention in a climb and it's airbrake very effective at level flight, so refrain from these types of defensive flying.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Cannons have a decent rate of fire and punch
* Good energy retention
* Decent acceleration
* Cockpit visibility is above average
* Decent manoeuvrability around 500-700 km/h (310-435 mph)
* Good roll rate

'''Cons:'''

* Low top speed
* Can rip its wings off in level flight
* Ineffective airbrake
* Guns have poor accuracy and very low muzzle velocity. Hitting a target can be difficult
* Ammunition is limited, restricted to firing short accurate bursts from close range
* Doesn't take battle damage very well especially to the wings of the aircraft

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The La-15 was a contemporary of the MiG-15 and Yak-30, that would see limited production numbers and remain in service through the 1950s in secondary roles. The NATO name for it was "Fantail."

Designer S.A. Lavochkin followed on his successful line of World War II piston-engine fighters with a series of jet prototypes in 1947. One of these, the La-174, became the basis for the production La-15. The fighter used a licence-built Rolls-Royce Derwent engine. A larger and more capable prototype, the La-176D, would be the first Soviet aircraft to break Mach (first in a dive in 1948 and then in level flight the next year) but never entered production.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=la-15 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|vGVV_IRRVVI|'''Permanent Disadvantages - La-174 / La-15''' - ''DEFYN''|AbjFlWS9EzI|'''La-15 and La-174 - First Impressions''' - ''MagzTV''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[La-174]]

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* [[Yak-30]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wikipedia:Lavochkin_La-15|[Wikipedia] Lavochkin La-15]]
* [http://www.airvectors.net/avlajet.html#m3 <nowiki>[Air Vectors]</nowiki> Lavochkin Jet Fighters - La-15]

{{AirManufacturer Lavochkin}}
{{USSR jet aircraft}}