{{Specs-Card
|code=late_298d
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was a French seaplane, designed as a torpedo bomber, which also took on the roles of a dive bomber and reconnaissance plane. In 1934, the French Navy was seeking replacement for the unsuccessful Laté 29 that had just entered service. The Latécoère 298 first flew on 6th May 1936. It was a single-engined monoplane powered by a Hispano Suiza 12Y liquid-cooled engine. Two large floats each containing a fuel tank were attached to the fuselage with struts. A single Type 1926DA torpedo could be carried between the floats or two 150 kg bombs or depth charges for anti-submarine duties. Offensive armament was made of two 7.5 mm Darne machine guns with one in each wing and one Darne on a flexible mount operated by observer. The Laté 298 entered service in 1938 with the French Navy Air Force. The Laté first saw action during the Battle of France where they were used in their maritime patrol aircraft role, although they never attacked any German ships. In the later phase of the war, they were used to attack armoured columns advancing through France with lower casualties than other types used. After the fall of France, the Vichy regime retained a few squadrons of the aircraft and used them mostly in Africa, while the Luftwaffe also used captured aircraft. After the Allied landings in Africa, the Laté was used by the Free French under Coastal Command in conjunction with Vickers Wellingtons for anti-submarine patrols. In 1944, they were used for the last time in combat during the liberation of France, attacking German shipping in the Channel. The last Laté 298 was retired in 1946, with some serving as trainers until 1950.

The Late 298D was introduced during [[Update "Apex Predators"]] as a reward for the [[wt:en/news/8021-event-winter-quest-en|2022 Winter Quest]] event. The Late 298D can be used as a fighter as it boasts very good manoeuvrability compared to its contemporaries, however it should be noted that its speed leaves much to be desired, with almost every biplane being significantly faster. The plane itself can utilize boom and zoom tactics due to its very high structural limit of 450 km/h. The armament is quite weak with only two rifle calibre machine guns with only 500 rpg. The Late 298D can also be used to capture points in naval battles.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max speed<br>(km/h at 2,500 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 285 || 278 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 23.0 || 23.9 || 3.7 || 3.7 || rowspan="2" | 400
|-
! Upgraded
| 306 || 295 || 21.1 || 22.0 || 7.0 || 5.2
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 450 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 450 || 450 || 320 || ~10 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < ___ || < ___ || < ___ || > ___
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->
''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.''

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Mle 33 (7.5 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 7.5 mm Mle 33 machine guns, wing-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|G2 Navale (75 kg)|I2 Navale (150 kg)|1926DA (400 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance presets:

* Without load
* 2 x 75 kg G2 Navale bombs (150 kg total)
* 2 x 150 kg I2 Navale bombs (300 kg total)
* 1 x 400 mm 1926DA torpedo

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Mle 33 (7.5 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 7.5 mm Mle 33 machine gun, dorsal turret (825 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Although classified as a light bomber, the Late 298D performs better as a fighter in air battles since the 2 x 150 kg I2 Navale bombs can only take out 3/4 of a base. Its torpedo doesn't come in handy because both air arcade and realistic maps rarely contain naval units.

The Late 298D can dogfight against multiple fighters at the same time and come out as the victor. The aircraft can out-turn its opponents with takeoff flaps, including biplanes. However, in dives, takeoff and landing flaps can generate so much lift that the aircraft starts to pitch up uncontrollably.

Its 2 x 7.5 mm machine guns are weak and require multiple rounds on target, but it can occasionally set planes ablaze. The dorsal turret machine gun is effective in engaging fighters behind the aircraft, since most planes at the BR are poorly armoured. Essentially, the Late 298D can both out-turn and engage enemy fighters from any position.

With the long awaited introduction of the French Navy in the patch "[[Update "Sky Guardians"|Sky Guardians]]", the value and utility of this aircraft in naval games has greatly increased with its ability to capture naval points and win matches.  Make sure to include the Late 298D in all your naval line-ups.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* 150 kg bombs are effective in taking out tanks in ground battles
* Can turn on a dime with flaps, can even out-turn some biplanes
* Can carry a torpedo, useful in naval games
* Can land and capture points in naval games

'''Cons:'''

* Slow speed means enemy planes can outrun you
* The torpedo finds limited use in Air Mission arcade and realistic battles due to the lack of naval targets
* A small hit to the engine or oil radiator means the aircraft has a very limited time to return to base before the engine overheats. Even AAA can cause this scenario to happen

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

Built as a successor to their earlier lacklustre Latécoère 290 torpedo bomber float plane, the new 298 outperformed its predecessor by wide margins and offered more capabilities. Not fast, its large wings did give it more manoeuvrability, aided by full-span flaps. Torpedoes and bombs were mounted in a semi-recessed bay (also called a "crutch"), and 2 fixed 7.5 mm machine guns plus 1 more defensive mount at the rear, a potent arsenal for 1938's warplanes.

Like most French aircraft, its missions changed, first against the Germans, then with the Germans after France surrendered, then reverting to helping the Allies liberate France after French Africa joined the Allies. It proved to be one of the more successful French war planes, being in service until 1951, with a handful existing for years later. Unfortunately, no surviving examples of this fantastic French aircraft exist today.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=late_298d Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|_R2hJWPJ8fc|'''LATE 298D! The NEW PREMIUM French EVENT aircraft!''' - ''MatAWG''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

* [[Ar 196 A-3]]
* [[He 51 B-2/H]]
* [[Ar 196 A-5 (Sweden)]]
* [[S17BS]]
* [[OS2U-1]]
* [[OS2U-3]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/8025-development-winter-event-vehicles-laté-298-en|[Devblog] Winter event vehicles: Laté 298]]

{{AirManufacturer Latecoere}}
{{France bombers}}
{{France premium aircraft}}