{{About
| about = German jet fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Me 262 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=me-262c-1a
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was a single experimental prototype of a standard Me 262A fighter that was modified with a single Walter HWK 109-509 rocket engine, used in the Me 163 Komet rocket fighter. The engine was put into the tail of the aircraft to enhance the speed of the 262 for interception of Allied bombers, thus being given the name "Heimatschützer": ''Home protector''. The aircraft was first flown using combined jet and rocket engine power on 27th February 1945.

Introduced in [[Update 1.39]], the Me 262 C-1a is intended as an interceptor, climbing very quickly under the power of the booster rocket combined with its two jet engines. However, the booster rocket has a small fuel supply and will only last a few minutes of use. Without its booster rocket, the Heimatschützer functions very similarly to the Me 262 A-1a, with the same armament, engines, and airframe, though with slightly worse flight performance due to the added weight.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 825 || 800 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 31.7 || 32.7 || 16.6 || 15.7 || rowspan="2" | 628
|-
! Upgraded
| 907 || 865 || 29.0 || 30.3 || 23.8 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 498 || 469 || 320 || ~11 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 500 || < 600 || < 680 || N/A
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="4" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="1" | Empty mass || colspan="3" | Wing loading (full fuel, no booster fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | Junkers Jumo 004B-1 || 2
| colspan="1" | 4,995 kg || colspan="3" | 269 kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="3" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load, no booster fuel) || rowspan="2" | Max Takeoff<br />Weight
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel || 22m fuel
|-
| 720 kg || colspan="2" | Axial-flow turbojet
| 5,247 kg || 5,777 kg || 5,953 kg || 7,800 kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB / SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="4" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (100%, no booster)
|-
! Condition || 100% || WEP
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel || 22m fuel || MTOW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || 910 kgf || N/A
| 0.35 || 0.32 || 0.31 || 0.23
|-
| ''Optimal'' || 910 kgf<br />(0 km/h) || N/A
| 0.35 || 0.32 || 0.31 || 0.23
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="6" | Booster (Walter HWK 109-509S - Liquid-fuel rocket)
! colspan="3" | Aircraft mass
|-
! rowspan="2" | Number || rowspan="2" | Booster<br />weight (each) || rowspan="2" | Fuel<br />weight (each) || rowspan="2" | Burn<br />Time || rowspan="2" | Can be<br />shutdown|| rowspan="2" | Jettisoned<br />after use
! colspan="3" | Mass with full booster fuel (no weapons load)
|-
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel || 22m fuel
|-
| 1 || 165 kg || 1,700 kg || 172s || Yes || No
| 6,947 kg || 7,477 kg || 7,653 kg
|-
! colspan="2" rowspan="2" | Condition
! colspan="2" rowspan="2" | {{Annotation|Maximum booster<br/>thrust @ 0 m (RB / SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each booster, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="2" rowspan="2" | {{Annotation|Combined engine<br/>& booster thrust @ 0 m|The total thrust produced by all engines and boosters. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="3" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (100% with booster)
|-
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel || 22m fuel
|-
| colspan="2" | ''Stationary'' || colspan="2" | 1,692 kgf || colspan="2" | 3,512 kgf
| 0.51 || 0.47 || 0.46
|-
| colspan="2" | ''Optimal'' || colspan="2" | 1,692 kgf<br />(any speed) || colspan="2" | 3,512 kgf<br />(0kph)
| 0.51 || 0.47 || 0.46
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 15 mm Steel - Behind pilot
* 15 mm Steel - Pilot's headrest
* 15 mm Steel - Between cockpit and fore fuel tank
* 15 mm Steel - Instrument panel plate
* 16 mm Steel x 2 - Ammunition protection plates
* 90 mm Bulletproof glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

The biggest issue of the Heimatschützer I is its poor acceleration across all speeds when the boosters are out of fuel. Thus, the "Compressor" and "New Engine" modifications should have the highest priority. The default ammo belts are decent, but the high explosive content increases with the new ammo. Because of this, researching the 30 mm Belts modification is not a bad idea. The "New Cannons" modification can also be researched to improve the accuracy and reliability of the 30 mm cannons.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MK 108 (30 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 4 x 30 mm MK 108 cannons, nose-mounted (2 x 100 rpg top + 2 x 80 rpg bottom = 360 total)

The Heimatschutzer I's cannon armament consists of four nose-mounted 30 mm Mk 108 autocannons. It has the same armament as the Me 262 A-1a. The Me 262 A-1a and the Me 262 C-1a Heimatschützer have the same burst mass of 14.52 kg/s (32.01 lbs/s).

== Usage in battles ==
''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Heavy armament of four 30 mm cannons
* Decent energy retention
* It has a rocket engine, allowing a climb to about 4000 m (13000 ft) within 1.5 minutes

'''Cons:'''

* Slow in comparison to other jets it may encounter
* Rocket propulsion is limited
* Its 30 mm guns are not optimal for jet combat, with low muzzle velocity and effective range
* Without its booster, it is a fairly slow climber
* Sluggish at high speeds due to control surface compression

== History ==
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=me-262c-1a Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|V77eUJjifzM|'''The Me-262 family''' discusses the {{PAGENAME}} at 4:38 - ''War Thunder Official Channel''}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/320883-messerschmitt-me-262-c-1a-c-2b/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer BFW}}
{{Germany jet aircraft}}