{{About
| about = German jet fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Me 262 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=me-262c-2b
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==

<!--''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.''-->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German jet fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.41]].

The {{PAGENAME}} is equipped with the [[MK 108 (30 mm)|30 mm MK 108]] autocannon, which has insane damage potential. With the third greatest in-game burst rate of 14.52 kg/s (32.01 lbs/s) and the great explosive warhead "minengeschoss" (=mine-shell) this weapon will vaporize aircraft, especially bombers. But every coin has a flip side and the "Sledgehammer" is no exception. The amazing rate of fire is bought with a very short barrel and small propellant charges, resulting in very bad ballistics: The slowest shells with the greatest bullet drop in-game. The Mk 108 makes no compromise, only the extremes.

The MK 108 is a very bad anti-fighter weapon particular in a jet to jet combat. Bullet drop and slow velocity result in difficult lead shots in ranges above 300 m (350 yds). In manoeuvre fights this trait gets even worse, the high speeds of jet battle push the necessary lead for hitting the target high, very high and in front of the enemy. Training with this weapon-system on a custom battle against random enemies is heavily advised.

The Sledgehammer cannons have an ammo indicator in the cockpit. It sits directly beneath the compass (the one with the little plane in the middle). A typical bar ammunition counter of the Luftwaffe. The left white column is for the two top auto-cannons. The right one is for the bottom two cannons, this bar is also taller than the left one as the ammo count is different for the two pairs.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 824 || 797 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 31.6 || 32.5 || 16.5 || 15.6 || rowspan="2" | 628
|-
! Upgraded
| 909 || 865 || 29.3 || 30.3 || 24.0 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="6" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear !! Drogue chute
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 498 || 469 || 320 || ~11 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 500 || < 600 || < 680 || N/A
|-
|}

==== Engine performance ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine
! colspan="3" | Aircraft mass
|-
! colspan="2" | Engine name || Number
! colspan="1" | Empty mass || colspan="2" | Wing loading (full fuel, no booster fuel)
|-
| colspan="2" | BMW 003-R || 2
| colspan="1" | 4,775 kg || colspan="2" | 260 kg/m<sup>2</sup>
|-
! colspan="3" | Engine characteristics
! colspan="2" | Mass with fuel (no weapons load, no booster fuel) || rowspan="2" | Max Takeoff<br />Weight
|-
! Weight (each) || colspan="2" | Type
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel
|-
| 673 kg || colspan="2" | Axial-flow turbojet
| 5,070 kg || 5,653 kg || 8,000 kg
|-
! colspan="3" | {{Annotation|Maximum engine thrust @ 0 m (RB / SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each engine, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="3" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (108%, no booster)
|-
! Condition || 100% || 108%
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel || MTOW
|-
| ''Stationary'' || 801 kgf || 910 kgf
| 0.36 || 0.32 || 0.23
|-
| ''Optimal'' || 801 kgf<br />(0 km/h) || 910 kgf<br />(0 km/h)
| 0.35 || 0.32 || 0.23
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="6" | Booster (BMW 109-718 - Liquid-fuel rocket)
! colspan="3" | Aircraft mass
|-
! rowspan="2" | Number || rowspan="2" | Booster<br />weight (each) || rowspan="2" | Fuel<br />weight (each) || rowspan="2" | Burn<br />Time || rowspan="2" | Can be<br />shutdown|| rowspan="2" | Jettisoned<br />after use
! colspan="2" | Mass with full booster fuel (no weapons load)
|-
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel
|-
| 2 || 165 kg || 850 kg || 163s || Yes || No
| 6,770 kg || 7,353 kg
|-
! colspan="2" rowspan="2" | Condition
! colspan="2" rowspan="2" | {{Annotation|Maximum booster<br/>thrust @ 0 m (RB / SB)|The maximum thrust produced by each booster, while mounted in the aircraft. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="2" rowspan="2" | {{Annotation|Combined engine<br/>& booster thrust @ 0 m|The total thrust produced by all engines and boosters. NOTE: Thrust varies significantly depending on speed & altitude.}}
! colspan="3" | Thrust to weight ratio @ 0 m (108% with booster)
|-
! 6m fuel || 20m fuel
|-
| colspan="2" | ''Stationary'' || colspan="2" | 1,224 kgf || colspan="2" | 4,268 kgf
| 0.63 || 0.58
|-
| colspan="2" | ''Optimal'' || colspan="2" | 1,224 kgf<br />(any speed) || colspan="2" | 4,268 kgf<br />(0kph)
| 0.63 || 0.58
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- 15 mm Steel - plate behind the pilot seat
- 15 mm Steel - plate headrest
- 15 mm Steel - Cockpit for plate
- 15 mm Steel - Instrument panel plate
- 16 mm Steel - 2 x plates protecting ammunition
- 90 mm Bulletproof glass

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

The biggest issue of the Schwalbe is its bad acceleration across all speeds. Thus "Compressor" and "New Engine" upgrades have the highest priority. The stock belts are decent, but the high explosive content increases with the new ammo, so including belts into the upgrade route is not a bad idea. The same applies to the rockets. Being able to knockout bases or tanks(direct hit) with these warheads, makes the late game much more easy to win if the last enemies are running or hiding. "New cannons" is an interesting upgrade choice as it increases accuracy above 300 m (350 yds), but the MK 108 will still be unable to hit a yarn-door at 500 m (600 yds). Cool-down and jamming is nothing the "Sledgehammer" has to deal with, considering the damage potential and low ammo count per gun.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|MK 108 (30 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 4 x 30 mm MK 108 cannons, nose-mounted (2 x 100 rpg top + 2 x 80 rpg bottom = 360 total)

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

Anti-fighter combat strategies include:

'''Climb''': Self-explanatory, rockets are used to boost oneself up to > 7000 m. Henceforth denying enemy fighters absolute altitude advantage. Of course, this must be followed through to the extreme, as once altitude advantage is gone, so will be the Me 262. Especially high-altitude prop-aircraft will be dangerous foes as jet-engine's power steadily declines over altitude. Whereas turbochargers and superchargers will keep the piston engine's power output steady. Watch out for these particular foes: [[P-47D-25|P-47D]], [[Bostwick's P-47M-1-RE|P-47M]], [[F8F-1B|F8F-1B]], [[Spitfire F Mk 24|Spitfire Mk 24]]/[[Spitfire F Mk 22|Mk 22]], [[J7W1|J7W1]] and [[Ta 152 H-1|Ta 152H-1]], if this strategy is chosen. Commence in classic Boom and Zoom tactics.

'''Aggressive climb''': Useful against pure enemy jet teams
The same principle as merely ''"Climb"'', however with the twist of actively engaging towards the hostile airfield to intercept with E-advantage enemy fighters. Air-Domination is established beyond the frontline with the prime directive to hinder enemy aircraft (especially jets) to gain any further altitude. If piston aircraft are present, this may prove to be difficult as these machines will be ''on'' or even ''above'' the Me 262 C upon contact. Hostile jets though will again not be on a similar energy state, making them on the first two initial passes easy prey. Good energy management is key though!

'''Rush''': Enemy team energy denial
This strategy can prove deadly but will provide similar aggressive team-mates with a better outset once team vs team combat starts.
Start boosters after spawning and use them to reach maximum level flight speed. Reduce engine throttle before losing a wing! Head straight for the enemy and disturb them in their acceleration & climb. The idea is to either seize targets of opportunity (e.g. AFK climbers, unaware targets) or to confuse the foes to give one's allies the aforementioned better vantage position.

'''Important note'''

Rocket boost should either be saved to compete against post-war jets or be used immediately to propel oneself up to 6,000 m before the hostile forces had the opportunity to gain any energy advantage.

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Great plane for arcade battles, as it climbs quickly with the rocket boosters and can land to refuel them
- Boom and zoom is a must with this plane, as it keeps up with all other jets
- Can use boosters to outrun and out-climb other aircraft
- Excellent energy retention, can hold onto speed earned from boosters for a good while
- Good roll rate

'''Cons:'''

- Handling feels Heavy
- Slow compared to other aircraft at the rank
- Horrible climb rate if boosters aren't in use
- Performs significantly worse than the A-1a variant
- MK 108s are not well suited for jet combat.
- No airbrakes to slow down

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=me-262c-2b Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|V77eUJjifzM|'''The Me-262 family''' discusses the {{PAGENAME}} at 5:17 - ''War Thunder Official Channel''}}

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

- ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
- ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==

<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

- [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/320883-messerschmitt-me-262-c-1a-c-2b/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer BFW}}
{{Germany jet aircraft}}
