{{About
| about = American fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = P-36 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=p-36g
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|cockpit=cockpit_p-36g.jpg
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.35]].

In the early 1930s, the Curtiss-Wright Corporation began a private venture to build a fighter aircraft which was a revolutionary departure from earlier cloth-covered biplanes of World War I. This project aircraft under development was named the Curtiss Hawk Model 75 (later it would be known by P-36 Hawk, Hawk-75 (or just H-75) and Mohawk). The P-36 was an all-metal monoplane (although the control surfaces were fabric-covered) with a 900 hp radial engine, enclosed cockpit and retractable landing gear.<ref name="MilFac" /> Even though this aircraft touted some of the state-of-the-art development in aircraft design, several aspects remained lacking, such as the original two machine guns firing through the propeller arc, a 7.62 mm and 12.7 mm and other critical components such as the absence of armour in the cockpit and self-sealing fuel tanks.

By May 1935 the first prototype flew and attained speeds of 452 km/h (281 mph) and reaching an altitude of 3,000 m (10,000 ft). It wasn't long before the original 900 hp Wright XR-1670-5 radial engine was replaced with an upgrade Wright XR-1820-39 Cyclone at 950 hp and several modifications to the body of the aircraft was completed like the addition of scalloped rear windows which significantly improved the pilots rear view (although the hump on the back of the aircraft still blocked a significant portion of the view).<ref name="JoeB" /><ref name="AviHis" /> This version of the aircraft was designated as Model 75B while oddly enough the earlier version with the 1670-5 was listed as a Model 75D.

In early competitions against the [[User:U5724584#P-35A|Seversky P-35A]] the underpowered and more expensive P-35A was seen as the winner in the U.S. government's eyes, however the United States Army Air Command (USAAC) went ahead and placed an order for three Y1P-36 prototypes as a backup contingency fighter. When delivered, the Y1P-36 (Model 75E) had been outfitted with the 900 hp Pratt & Whitney R-1830-13 Twin Wasp engine. Due to this version of the aircraft performing so well, an order for 210 P-36-A fighters was placed.<ref name="JoeB" /><ref name="MilFac" />

The P-36 was known as an outstanding turning aircraft due to its extremely low wing loading and had a beefy power-to-weight ratio of 0.186 hp/lb that placed this aircraft as one of the best climbing aircraft of the time.<ref name="AviHis" /> One drawback noted was that the P-36 was not outfitted with a supercharger which hampered its ability to operate at high altitudes, requiring it to stay under 10,000 ft in altitude.<ref name="MilFac" /> For all of this aircraft's positive attributes and unfortunate shortcomings, it performed well mostly for other nations such as Finland where the Hawk was known as "Sussu" or Finnish for "Sweetheart" as between 58 Finnish pilots flying the Hawk, they scored 190.3 aerial victories. The P-36 was the proving ground and stepping stone to the later great fighter, the [[P-40 (Family)|P-40]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
The {{PAGENAME}} is a relatively easy fighter aircraft to fly and requires only a relatively short space to both take-off and land. During World War II the P-36 was ferried over to Pearl Harbor aboard an aircraft carrier from which they took off and then landed at the Army Air Corps base.<ref name="MilFac" /> In the game, due to the very low stall speed, the P-36 can land on an aircraft carrier to a complete stop and take off again. Due to the fantastically low wing loading rate of 23.9 lb/ft<sup>2</sup><ref name="JoeB" />, this fighter is an excellent turning aircraft and accompanied by a strong rudder can spiral climb easily, especially during WEP cycles. This aircraft has the advantage of being both a turn fighter and a Boom & Zoom fighter, depending on the situation, type of aircraft which are flying against and mission type. The P-36 will out-turn many fighters of its rank and can prove difficult to follow if attempting to shoot it down.

The {{PAGENAME}} utilises the upgraded Pratt & Whitney R-1820-95 radial engine, an upgrade over the [[P-36A]] and [[P-36C]] Pratt & Whitney R-1830-17, however with the extra two machine guns and associated ammunition, the G model is comparable to the C model in comparison to flight characteristics. Maintaining centre of gravity in the {{PAGENAME}} is critical and to do that the nose-mounted machine guns do not eject their spent ammunition cartridges, but instead, collect them in internal fuselage compartments so as to not drastically change the weight after firing off the rounds, whereas unlike the P-36C, the G model does eject its spent cartridges from the wing guns. As with the [[P-36C]], the trade-off for more guns vs. no increase in manoeuvrability is well worth it.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 3,048 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 477 || 461 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 17.7 || 18.2 || 7.0 || 7.0 || rowspan="2" | 183
|-
! Upgraded
| 527 || 501 || 16.7 || 17.0 || 15.5 || 10.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 488 || 446 || 232 || ~11 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 380 || < 420 || > 300
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 2,133 m || 1,000 hp || 1,200 hp
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 2
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 4,571 m || 900 hp || 1,080 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 9.5 mm armoured pilot seat
* Self-sealing fuel tanks

As with many early pre-war fighters, not much emphasis was put on the survivability of the aircraft. The best course of action was for the pilot to not let anyone get behind them. The {{PAGENAME}}'s only sources of protection for the pilot is the engine block and the 9.5 mm (angled at 24° for effective thickness of 13 mm), that being said, depending on the engine block to save the pilot may do so at the expense of the engine, thus requiring the pilot to glide back to base if possible or bailout. There are also two unprotected oil coolers if which are punctured, the aircraft will leak oil until depleted eventually causing the engine to seize up.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)|Browning (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, nose-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)
* 4 x 7.62 mm Browning machine guns, wing-mounted (500 rpg = 2,000 total)

Armament weaknesses found in the [[P-36A]] and [[P-36C]] were addressed when outfitting the {{PAGENAME}} fighter, as the armament though increasingly better with each model upgrade, was still found lacking. While the engine cowling was already crowded and no more machine guns could be centrally mounted which required wing modifications to install two more 7.62 mm machine guns, for a total of two in each wing. For this aircraft, two machine guns are mounted in the engine cowl and fire through the propeller arc while the other four are mounted two in each wing. Due to the wing-mounted machine guns, convergence is a factor to deal with with the optimal range being 100 - 200 m, anything beyond this will still work, however, the bullets significantly start losing their punch. The increase in armament increased the damage output ability of the fighter, making it well worth the additional weight. Options in ammunition will allow the pilot to select the type best suited for their mission whether it be as an interceptor, ground target hunter or a stealthy pouncer.

;Option 1 Configuration (optimal 200 - 400 m convergence)

* 12.7 mm = Ground target rounds
* 7.62 mm = Stealth round
* The use of ground target rounds gives you access to hard-hitting ammunition rounds with tracers to help guide in the rounds, however, the 7.62 mm should be set up with stealth rounds as providing a good mix of armour-piercing and incendiary rounds without the tell-tale tracers. Without the tell-tale show of tracers flying by, the pilot of the aircraft may assume a weakly armed aircraft is on their tail with intermittent tracers from the 12.7 mm machine gun. This can be a huge advantage for the attacking aircraft by sneaking in a large amount of lead and incendiaries while still having the ability to walk in the shots with the tracers (especially helpful in realistic and simulator battles where the aiming helper is not available for use).

==== 12.7 mm ammunition ====
* '''Default:''' {{Annotation|T|M1 tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|Ball|M2 Omni-purpose}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|M1 incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}
* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|M1 tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|M1 incendiary}}
* '''Ground targets:''' {{Annotation|T|M1 tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}
* '''Tracers:''' {{Annotation|T|M1 tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|M1 tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|M1 tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}
* '''Stealth:''' {{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|M1 incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|M2 armour-piercing}}

==== 7.62 mm ammunition ====
* '''Default:''' {{Annotation|T|Tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|Ball|Omni-purpose}}{{-}}{{Annotation|Ball|Omni-purpose}}{{-}}{{Annotation|Ball|Omni-purpose}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|Incendiary}}
* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|T|Tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|Incendiary}}
* '''Tracers:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|Tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|Tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|Tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|T|Tracer}}
* '''Stealth:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|Incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|Incendiary}}

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The {{PAGENAME}} Hawk is one of the best fighter aircraft at Rank I as it combines energy retention, manoeuvrability and decent firepower. Energy retention lends this fighter to be a great zoomer, dropping in for a shot and then speeding back up to regain the energy advantage. With this aircraft having such a low stall speed; it makes a great fighter to practice Rope-a-dope energy depletion manoeuvres. This requires the P-36 pilot to bait another fighter into following them in a climb, as the attacker attempts to get guns on, the P-36 pilot can start to spiral climb which will cause the attacking aircraft to pull a tighter circle haemorrhaging their energy. If done correctly, the attacking fighter will stall out and be completely helpless as they begin to fall back to the ground allowing the P-36 to roll over or Split-S and take out the stalled fighter below.

Most fighters are typically only good at one thing whether its turning, speed or weapon systems, however, the P-36 is good at two, speeding and turning. This fighter has the ability to not only zoom attack but can also turn fight competitively with most other aircraft. There are few aircraft (notably the A6M Zero fighters of the Imperial Japanese Navy) which may outshine while turning, however, when utilizing flaps and rudder while turning, the P-36 can manoeuvre into some tight turns and allow guns to get on target.

Even with all of its power and mobility, the P-36 is a relatively fragile aircraft. Without much armour on the aircraft, many of its critical systems are exposed and it will not take much even from lower calibre machine guns to cause fuel fires, oil leaks and the engine shutdowns, not to mention a knocked out pilot. Situational awareness is critical to potentially know not only where the targets are, but also the enemy aircraft which are manoeuvring into position and ready to pounce, however, structurally the aircraft is sound and has been known to survive aerial collisions which allowed it to continue fighting on where other aircraft would have been shedding parts right and left. The {{PAGENAME}} is beefed up with six machine guns, though it may not have the notoriety of the [[I-16 (Family)|I-16]] and the [[LaGG-3 (Family)|LaGG-3]], it is more than capable of challenging them on a more than even footing.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Excellent climb speed
* Excellent dive speed
* Better-than-average turn-radius
* Good energy retention for Boom & Zoom manoeuvres
* Two more machine guns (six total) for increased firepower over the [[P-36C]]

'''Cons:'''

* Lack of turbocharger relegates this fighter to lower altitudes
* No suspended armament options
* Less-than-average roll rate at high speeds
* Very little armour protection
* Poor in a head-on, engine and pilot exposed

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The P-36 Hawk began its life at Curtiss Aeroplane Company as a design in the early 1930s. A private venture by Curtiss, the project was headed up by Donovan A. Berlin, a former Northrop aircraft company engineer who was the principal designer and incorporated design portions of early Northrop designs.<ref name="MilFac" /> The P-36, at this time known as the X-17Y, was a stretch from the biplane years by utilizing an all-metal low-wing monoplane with fabric-covered control surfaces. This aircraft also featured retractable landing gear, which utilized a design put forward by Boeing Aircraft Company and required royalties to be paid to Boeing for every aircraft in which this landing gear was installed.<ref name="JoeB" /><ref name="AviHis" /> Initial weapon load-outs included the standard 12.7 mm and 7.62 mm machine guns, both of which were mounted in the forward fuselage deck and fired through openings in the cowling, synchronized to fire through the propeller arc.<ref name="AviHis" />

The initial flight took place in 1935 and when it was presented at a competition the next year, the competitor aircraft (Seversky SEV-2XP/P-35) was heavily damaged in transit. While Seversky took their aircraft back to perform repairs and modifications, Curtiss took the opportunity during this time to make some modifications of their own, and namely replacing the Wright XR-1670-5 twin-row air-cooled radial engine with the upgraded Write XR-1820-39 Cyclone radial.<ref name="MilFac" /> With the Seversky aircraft repaired, the competition was back on. Even though the Seversky aircraft underperformed and was more expensive than Curtis X-17Y, it was selected and an order of 77 aircraft were put in for, however later the Material Division of the USAAC contacted Curtis and put in an order for three examples as they were becoming nervous about Seversky's ability to deliver their aircraft on time. Curtiss worked on modifying the P-36 by again upgrading the motor and working on the cockpit, especially increasing the amount of area behind the cockpit where the pilot could see. During the 1937 competition, test pilots who piloted the P-36 all commented that the aircraft responded to pilot input favourable and at all speeds and even noted that it handled well on the ground while taxiing. With such a reaction from the test pilots, the USAAC put in an order for 210 P-36A fighters, which at that time was the largest single US military aircraft order since World War I.<ref name="JoeB" />

As the P-36 fighters began to roll off the assembly line, they were shipped to US squadrons, however, problems developed with the aircraft which left them grounded while waiting repairs. The P-36 continued to have problems, however, four P-36A fighters stationed at Wheeler Air Field in Hawaii were able to get airborne and attach a flight of Nakajima B5N1 torpedo bombers, claiming two shot down and gaining the first US fighter aircraft "kills" of the Pacific War. Despite this action, the P-36 fighters were withdrawn from combat outfits and sent to training units for new pilots to train on. While the P-36 did not see much action with the U.S., it did see combat action while flown by other nations such as France and Finland where they put the little fighter to the test and were highly successful with it. 10 P-36A training fighters were transferred in 1942 to Brazil where they remained in service until 1954.<ref name="JoeB" />

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Not long before the Germans occupied Norway, the Norwegian government put in another order with the Curtiss company. In January 1940, a contract was signed for 36 Curtiss Hawk 75A-8 fighters.

The new model differed from the Curtiss Hawk 75A-6s in its improved weaponry and its 9-cylinder single-row air-cooled Wright GR-1820-G205A Cyclone engine with a maximum output of 1,200 hp.

The Curtiss Hawk 75A-8 possessed two large-calibre 12.7 mm synchronized Colt-Browning ANM2.5 machine guns in the fuselage with 200 rounds each and four 7.62 mm Colt-Browning ANM2.3 machine guns mounted on the wing panels with 500 rounds each. Bomb racks were installed on the underside wing panels.

This model was equipped with a fixed loop radio compass, the antenna of which was installed above the fuselage spine fairing behind the pilot's cockpit in a characteristic teardrop fairing.

The order was fully completed by the end of 1940, but all the planes of this model remained overseas due to the occupation of Norway. The exiled Norwegian government received only 6 Curtiss Hawk 75A-8 fighters and used them as training planes to prepare fighter pilots for the Norwegian Army Air Service in so-called Little Norway at Toronto, Canada until mid-1943.

The remaining Curtiss Hawk 75A-8s were integrated into the USAAF with the designation P-36G.

By this time, the Curtiss Hawk 75A was no longer of high value as a fighter, and the other P-36s in the USAAF were powered by different engines. Because of these issues, the P-36Gs were transferred to Peru in 1943 as part of the lend-lease program.

The Latin-American country's formerly Norwegian Curtiss Hawk 75A-8 fighters served peacefully until 1954.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=p-36g Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|qrNWrb-ianw|'''Magic FUN Times! P-36G Hawk! - USA - Review!''' - ''Jengar''|dHiWxG9r-k8|'''War Thunder: P-36G Hawk''' - ''MagzTV''|G3cXlOGKXyc|'''War Thunder Realistic: P-36G Hawk [Little Beast!]''' - ''Jengar''|91duRbIoCPM|'''The Shooting Range #91''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 04:02 discusses the P-36.}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development
* [[P-36 (Family)]]

;Analogues of other nations

* Polikarpov [[I-180S]]
* Nakajima [[Ki-43 (Family)|Ki-43]]
* Reggiane [[Re.2000 serie 1|Re.2000]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wikipedia:Curtiss_P-36_Hawk|[Wikipedia] Curtiss P-36 Hawk]]
* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/86594-p-36-h-75/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

=== References ===
;Citations
<references>
<ref name="JoeB">Baugher, Joe (1999)</ref>
<ref name="MilFac">Militaryfactory.com website (2019)</ref>
<ref name="AviHis">Aviationhistory.com website (2007)</ref>
</references>

;Bibliography
* Aviationhistory.com website. [http://www.aviation-history.com/curtiss/p36.htm The Curtiss P-36 Hawk]. ''The Aviation History Online Museum website'', On-line 12 June 2007. Retrieved 24 August 2019.
* Baugher, Joe. [http://www.joebaugher.com/usaf_fighters/p36_1.html Curtiss P-36A Curtiss P-36A]. ''Joebauer.com website", On-line 12 June 1999. Retrieved 24 August 2019.''
* Militaryfactory.com website (2019) [https://www.militaryfactory.com/aircraft/detail.asp?aircraft_id=155 Curtiss P-36 Hawk (Hawk 75 / Mohawk).] ''Militaryfactory.com website'', On-line 10 May 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.

{{AirManufacturer Curtiss}}
{{USA fighters}}