{{About
|about=gift American fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
|other
|usage-1 = other vehicles of the family
|link-1 = P-40 (Family)
|usage-2 = other uses
|link-2 = P40 (Disambiguation)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=p-40e_td
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a gift rank {{Specs|rank}} American fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update "New Power"]] as a [[wt:en/news/6968-more-twitch-drops-en|reward for watching War Thunder streams on Twitch.tv]] along with a unique skin for the vehicle.

The P-40E Warhawk is an excellent "boom-n-zoom" fighter/bomber, however, it is not limited to this kind of warfare. It is equipped with 6 x M2 Browning .50 cal machine guns which are remarkably effective against light pillboxes, some light tanks/AAA, and of course, planes. The P-40 can also equip bombs to round itself out as a decent low-rank fighter bomber.

Any competent realistic battle Warhawk flyer will tell you that it is only good at Medium altitudes (3,000 m is normally considered that middle altitude). This is because the engine's performance is poor at higher altitudes, unlike its future successors- the [[P-51D-5|P-51]] and P-47. The P-40's main asset is its straight-line speed- it will easily outrun Bf 109s, A6Ms, and some "modernized" biplanes you may see at its 2.3 battle rating. Head-ons are almost never advisable, but given the high velocity and fire rate of the .50 cals, lightly armoured planes such as the A6M can be taken head-on from a distance.

Otherwise, use the high speed and decent engine performance at low altitude to out-speed and energy-fight enemy planes. At high speeds, the P-40 can out-turn a select few Axis and British fighters, including some lower-rank Bf 109s and Hawker [[Hurricane (Family)|Hurricanes]]. Never attempt to turn with Zeros, He 112s, Spitfires or low-rank Soviet fighters as they will almost always have the turn advantage and get the better angle of attack.

In short, the P-40 is one of the best performing low-rank US planes due to its high speed and general performance which outmatches most, if not all, opponents at the 2.3 battle rating.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
The P-40 is a very good mix of everything. It accelerates well, has good manoeuvrability, nice turn time and withstands from 12 to -5 G. It behaves best below 550 km/h.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 3,810 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 533 || 514 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 22.0 || 22.8 || 6.8 || 6.8 || rowspan="2" | 343
|-
! Upgraded
| 592 || 560 || 20.3 || 21.0 || 15.9 || 10.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 819 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 595 || 530 || 245 || ~13 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 420 || < 380 || < 420 || > 340
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 6.35 mm steel between liquid cooling system and oil cooling system
* 8 mm steel behind pilot
* 38 mm bulletproof glass in front of pilot
* Self-sealing fuel tanks (1 under pilot, 1 in front of pilot's feet, 1 behind pilot)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 6 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, wing-mounted (312 rpg outer + 291 rpg middle + 240 rpg inner = 1,686 total)

The {{PAGENAME}} with its six .50 calibre machine guns are much like a precursor to the P-47 with its eight .50 calibre machine guns. While not as devastating as a 20 mm autocannon, the six machine guns when connecting with a target will do a considerable amount of damage, to the point of causing a critical hit if not blowing off a wing or severing a fuselage. Unlike aircraft with nose-mounted weapons, the wing-mounted guns require the pilot to set a convergence point. Typically a convergence point is set around 250 - 400m (or even closer if you typically fly on the enemy's tail) will be enough to thoroughly dismantle an enemy airplane. Though the guns can be pushed to fire at aircraft which are further away, however, they start losing their punch and chances of critically damaging the enemy starts dropping. Due to the issue of convergence, head-on attacks are discouraged unless the pilot is proficient at cantering the aircraft slightly so that one set of guns fires in a straight path towards the head-on attacker.

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|AN-M30A1 (100 lb)|AN-M64A1 (500 lb)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 2 x 100 lb AN-M30A1 bombs (200 lb total)
* 1 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bomb (500 lb total)
* 1 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bomb + 2 x 100 lb AN-M30A1 bombs (700 lb total)

As an early version of a multi-role aircraft, the {{PAGENAME}} can be configured as a fighter/interceptor or a fighter/bomber. Bombs can be outfitted to the {{PAGENAME}} to allow for strategic bombing and low altitudes, many times during a diving run. Less effective at bombing bases, this fighter can lob the bombs to pick off smaller and lighter targets which may be spread across the map and once the bombs are released, it can resume its fighter role. The disadvantage of carrying bombs on this aircraft come with reduced manoeuvrability. The roll rate of this aircraft dramatically changes when carrying the two 100 lb bombs under the wings, however, the single 500 lb bomb though heavier, with its being mounted on the fuselage hardpoint it doesn't affect the roll rate as much.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
'''Air combat in RB'''

The P-40 is good at turn fights and low altitude fights only against fighters like Bf 109s it faces, e.g. the [[Bf 109 E-3|E-3]], [[Bf 109 G-2|G-2s]] and [[Bf 109 F-4|F-4s]]; these aircraft cannot really turn with it but are faster. The speed of this aircraft at 560 km/h makes it pretty fast for its rank and BR, however, this is only applicable to low altitudes. An important point is that the aircraft engine chokes above 5,000 m and becomes basically a sitting duck at this altitude.

When you dive on other planes, watch your speed. The P-40 is nearly uncontrollable at speeds higher than 600 km/h, its ideal speed is between 400 and 500 km/h. However, structurally, the P-40 is surprisingly strong and can turn/dive very quickly at high speeds.

Compared to other planes at the 2.3 battle rating, the P-40 is fairly well-armed. The 6 x M2 machine guns can rip apart most enemy aircraft. A well-trained burst can take any fighter, however, some attackers (namely the well-armoured [[IL-2 (Family)|IL-2]]) and larger bombers might take a little bit more patience and a few more passes. Ammo capacity is also very good and will easily last an entire RB match, given that the pilot has good accuracy and trigger control.

'''Air combat in SB'''

The P-40 can be used for BnZ fighting, bomber hunting and ground pounding in Sim. It is a decent plane with distinct pros and cons. Its heavy firepower of 6 x 12.7 mm MGs can critically damage the enemy and rip it apart. It also has great dive speed and decent level speed, capable of outrunning slower opponents like A6M. However, it is a nose-heavy plane so unlike other planes, the P-40 has to trim the elevators upwards. It has extremely limited visibility with lots of canopy frames and a razorback design which obstructs the backwards visibility. The P-40's over-the-nose visibility is one of the worst due to its big, long engine, and the small intake on top of the cowling, making leading very hard. Moreover, its engine tends to overheat frequently even with 95% throttle, meaning you have to cut throttle a lot to avoid damaging the engine.

Before entering a battle, it is recommended to set keybinds for trimming and vertical head movements to improve the forward visibility a bit. Take at least 30 minutes of fuel. Set the convergence between 250-500 m, with vertical targeting on.

For dogfighting, because almost all aerial battles in Sim occurs at below 3,000 m, the P-40 can easily climb to this altitude and gather up lots of speed before engaging a battle. The tactic is similar to the RB one above, which is to keep speed and boom and zoom. If, unfortunately, you find yourself being chased on your six and you don't know how to do any defensive manoeuvres, do a large, smooth turn towards the nearest friendly airfield to avoid bleeding too much speed. Then shallow-dive towards your airfield. The P-40 can quite easily outrun opponents like the [[A6M (Family)|A6M]] or [[I-15 (Family)|I-15]], but struggles to outrun [[Bf 109 (Family)|Bf 109 F/Gs]], [[Fw 190 (Family)|Fw 190 A]] or other [[P-40 (Family)|P-40s]]. Another way of disengaging is to do a sudden Split-S to dodge under the chaser. Average Sim players will now try and see where you went, if not immediately losing track of you. You can then run for your airfield or shallow climb for another attack.

You want to be more careful when hunting bombers, since with the Sim control (whether it be mouse joystick or a real stick) the plane will manoeuvre much more gently, making itself a great target for the bomber's gunners. DO NOT follow behind a bomber's six unless you are sure that its tail gunners are unconscious. Chasing behind a bomber makes yourself pretty much stationary for the tail gunners, and you will be showered with bullets. The engine of the P-40 will usually get damaged. Instead, before launching an attack, get an altitude advantage over the bomber by flying around 2 km above it. The bomber should only fill up about 1/6 of your gunsight. The best position for an attack is at the bomber's high six so you can adjust the lead much easier. Dive at the bomber, but not directly at it, try to predict where you two will crash by imagining yourself as a missile, that's where you should aim at (deflection shooting). To maximise the damage it is better to aim for their wings and engines, as the fuselage usually soaks up quite some bullets. Only fire when the bomber passes in front of your guns. This short window might seems inadequate to do anything, but the six MGs on the P-40 are actually pretty destructive, as sometimes it only takes one bullet to set the target aflame.

In short, always remember to energy fight and use the P-40's high top speed to quickly dive away and leave combat if things get hairy.

'''The Ground Attack Role'''

The P-40E can carry a bomb payload of 2 x 100 lb or 1 x 500 lb or 2 x 100 lb + 1 x 500 lb (700 lb), making it a decent ground attack fighter for its rank. The Ground Targets belt for the .50 cals allow the P-40 to rip apart enemy AAA, Pillboxes, and even most German/Japanese light tanks. [[Pz.II (Disambiguation)|Pz.II]]s, [[BT-5]] and [[BT-7|-7]]s, [[Chi-Ha]]s, etc., can all be torn to shreds with the .50 cals- primarily from the side and top. Note that in SB, the P-40 will wobble a lot (sideways mainly) so you must get used to smoothing the plane down in order to hit ground targets.

Some concerning fighters that the P-40E-1 should worry about are:

* Bf 109s: [[Bf 109 E-3|Emil]]
* [[A6M2|A6M2]], the "Zero"
* [[Yak-1B|Yak 1B]]/[[Yak-7B|Yak-7B]]
* Spitfires: [[Spitfire Mk IIb|Mk.II]], [[Spitfire Mk Vb/trop|Mk.Vb]] )
* Hurricane Mk IVs with mounted cannons

'''Against the [[Bf 109 (Family)|Bf 109]]:'''

Turn flight- the BF-109 is typically a superior aircraft in terms of climb rate and vertical manoeuvres. However, early/mid-rank 109s can be turned against in the Warhawk, especially at higher speeds.

'''Against the [[A6M (Family)|Zero]]:'''

*Boom & Zoom - dive on the target and engage. Due to its lack of armour and large fuel tanks, the A6M is easy to destroy.
*Outrun the A6M- the A6M isn't a really high-speed plane, the P-40E can outrun it flat-out easily, so turn around after 3-4km and try to head-on or start climbing then. The A6M might start to climb to try and gain energy- if you keep running from it, you will put enough space between you and your opponent to climb to an acceptable altitude, or re-group with allies

Never, ever, ever turn fight a Zero. Zeros are the natural and historical nemeses of Allied aircraft, it can manoeuvre way better than the P-40s and those 2 x 20 mm cannons can rip them to shreds

'''Against the [[Yak-7B|Yak-7]]:'''

*Turn fighting is recommended as a last resort, especially with the Yak-1B's superior handling and turn-radius. You will not be able to outrun a Yak and head-ons are not advised due to the Yak's nose weapons. Try and get a friend to assist you, without losing speed- avoid engaging and losing speed, otherwise, the Yak will catch you. If you are in a squad, stick together and use the scissor-baiting method, until an opponent locks onto one of you, then you can destroy it. Boom and zoom should be used, but the circumstances often don't arise.

'''Against [[Spitfire (Family)|Spitfires]]:'''

*Try to Boom & Zoom, if given the position to do so. In a straight line, the P-40 will outrun a [[Spitfire Mk Ia|Spitfire Mk.I]] at lower altitudes, but not out-climb it. The performance of the Spitfire makes it a difficult enemy, only turn fight with it at high speeds, with wingmen or more teammates around is the optimal solution. The {{PAGENAME}} is also more heavily armed than a Spitfire, so attempting to risk a head-on shot may pay off, especially since both aircraft have to deal with convergence issues. However, skilled Spitfire pilots will not be baited into such a shot and will usually break off before an effective firing solution can be achieved.

'''Against the [[Hurricane Mk IV]] (mounted with cannons)'''

* Do not go head-on! This specific vehicle has the most potent cannon installed on a fighter at or around this battle rating. Any tactic that is not a frontal attack is effective. Something else to note that is the Hurricane Mk. IV's controls will lock up at slower speeds than the {{PAGENAME}}'s in the vertical, thus giving the P-40 an advantage when making high-speed manoeuvres while diving. However, the Hurricane is much more manoeuvrable even with the gun pods installed and can reverse the roles if the attacker is not careful.

'''Against the [[H6K4]]/[[B18A]]'''

* These bombers all have fairly deadly defensive guns. The H6K has a powerful 20 mm cannon facing backwards, so avoid tailing it from its six unless its gunner is unconscious. Engage from its sides or high six and aim for its wings. Your 6 x 12.7 mm MG will destroy its wing structures easily or set it aflame. For the B18, their 13.2 mm MG will easily snap the P-40's wing off with a short burst so avoid attacking them from behind. Utilise deflection shooting against them, to give their gunners little chance of targeting you.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Powerful low to mid-altitude performance
* Decent roll rate
* Lots of vibrant and historically accurate camouflage to unlock
* Good flat out speed
* Good dive speed
* Fast at level flight
* Can carry bombs
* Somewhat adequate cockpit visibility despite lots of bars
* Pilot is protected by a steel plate behind his seat and by another plate and a bulletproof glass from the front
* Deadly armament (6 x 50.cal HMGs), easily rip apart any opponents
* Extremely strong rudder, can help with manoeuvres a lot and decrease turn radius (AB)

'''Cons:'''

* Poor climb rate
* Poor high altitude performance
* Poor turn time compared to other single-seat fighters of similar time period and rank
* Poor energy retention
* Low ammunition count
* Elevators completely lock up at 600 km/h (352 mph)
* Rear visibility from the cockpit is hindered by the armour plate
* Quite unstable in yaw and pitch axis (RB and SB)
* Extremely bad visibility over the nose in SB
* Must adjust for convergence of wing-mounted guns

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
{{main|P-40E-1#History|l1=History of the P-40E-1}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=p-40e_td Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|LpJHSzP3Y9I|'''P-40E-1 TD "Worst Piggyback Ride Ever!"''' - ''Bo Time Gaming''|6pkgIZ8Isgw|'''Twitch Drop plane P-40E-1TD''' - ''8Bit Dane''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development
* Curtiss [[P-36 (Family)|P-36]] Hawk
* Curtiss [[P-40 (Family)]]

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era
* Bell [[P-39 (Family)|P-39]] Airacobra
* Reggiane [[Re.2001 (Family)|Re.2001]]
* Macchi [[C. 202 (Family)|C. 202]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{Twitch Drops}}
{{USA fighters}}