{{About
| about = American fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = P-63 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=p-63c-5
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|cockpit=cockpit_p-63c-5.jpg
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

There is an identical variant of the P-63 in the french tree - {{Specs-Link|p-63c-5_france}}. The key difference is in the fact that the French variant has access to the [[Incendiary weapons#Incendiary bombs|incendiary bombs]], while the US model doesn't.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,572 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 627 || 609 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 24.2 || 25.1 || 16.8 || 16.8 || rowspan="2" | 289
|-
! Upgraded
| 713 || 663 || 22.3 || 23.0 || 29.0 || 21.7
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 887 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 378 || 359 || 262 || ~12 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 410 || < 380 || < 410 || > 420
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 15.87 mm Steel - Plates x 2, lower fore cockpit
* 19.05 mm Steel - Plate, upper fore cockpit
* 12.7 mm Steel - Plate behind pilot's seat
* 12.7 mm Steel - Plate protecting oil cooling system
* 38 mm Bulletproof glass - Windscreen

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

Initially, the aircraft's flat speed is not fast enough to outrun Fw 190 A and F-8s that it may face, so it's recommended to upgrade engine performance first. Armament, although it won't improve greatly, is the next recommendation considering how underwhelming it may be on some occasions- do this by researching ammo belts, then improvements to the cannon.

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 37 mm M10 cannon, nose-mounted (58 rpg)
* 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, nose-mounted (250 rpg = 500 total)
* 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, wing-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|AN-M64A1 (500 lb)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 3 x 500 lb AN-M64A1 bombs (1,500 lb total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

This aircraft is an improved version of the previous Kingcobra carrying the same armament and main gun. The aircraft is still a high-altitude interceptor/ energy fighter, with its turn radius slightly better than before. The quick dive speed and high energy retention allow the player, with the correct altitude, to engage opponents below numerous times using the high yo-yo method. This aircraft should not be used for ground attack due to its average ammo count.

The 37 mm M10 cannon is powerful. Aim carefully when firing, and do not fire too quickly, lest your gun jam and you lose your main weapon. A single shot to a wing or fuselage of an enemy plane will be all that it takes to bring it down.

The M2 Brownings can be used to inflict damage or to judge the range for your cannon shot.

The C-5 has slightly lower climb rate than the A-10. However, this is relatively trivial as both planes are generally evenly matched. Keep this in mind, though, when selecting your load out.

It is recommended to use the P-63 against large fighters and bombers. It is far easier to hit a bomber with the cannon then a small fighter with it.

Head-on attacks are not advisable: the large cannon combined with the relatively weak M2s make for poor head-on accuracy. Only engage in head-ons if you are absolutely confident in your aim.

Boom & Zoom is also an effective tactic with this plane. Its large cannon makes getting shots while diving relatively easy, and its high climb rate and energy retention can get it to safety.

Bomber hunting is also extremely effective with the P-63, a large bomber is far easier to hit with a massive cannon. A single shot can take off a bomber's wing. However, don't spam the cannon. Keep the delay between shots at a 1-1.5 second. Firing too quickly will result in a jam, which makes your plane almost useless offensively.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Excellent dive speed
* Excellent energy retention
* Good flat out speed
* Good cannon damage
* Good climb rate

'''Cons:'''

* Average turn time
* Cannon is situational due to low velocity and rate of fire
* Prone to engine damage when being chased
* Default paint scheme makes the aircraft visible at a longer distance
* Rudder locks at high speed making it hard to get guns on target in Boom & Zoom

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The P-63C-5 was the second production series of the P-63 Kingcobra. The main improvement was the more powerful Allison V-1710-117 engine, capable of producing 1,500 hp on war emergency power and 1,800 hp with water injection. Additionally, the wingspan was reduced by 10 inches. 1,227 P-63C Kingcobras were produced.

Although being produced in the United States, the P-63 Kingcobra was not heavily used by American forces for combat operations. Instead, they were often converted to target aircraft for aerial gunnery training. Most P-63s, though, were exported to the Soviet Union during the war through the Lend-Lease Act.

The P-63 was removed from the Soviet western front in 1943 in order to focus the units on the east for an eventual invasion of Japan. However, both Soviet units and German units reported the presence of P-63 fighters on that front. One Soviet account goes as far as to say that the entire 4th Guards Aviation Regiment (4 GvlAP) was converted to the P-63 in 1944, while they were officially flying the P-39. German accounts also detail the downing of P-63 aircraft by flak guns and fighter aircraft. The official Soviet records still claim that only P-39s were used against Germany.

In the time before the P-63s were transferred to the east, it had been proven as a capable fighter, although there is a widely believed myth that P-63s were used only in the ground attack role. The Kingcobra was able to achieve a number of victories over German aircraft in that time. In the Pacific theatre, P-63s were used during the Soviet invasion of Manchuko and northern Korea. They flew ground attack, close air support, and escort missions in that theatre. The first Soviet air victory with the type in the Pacific was on 15 August 1945, when Lejtenant I. F. Miroshnichenko from 17th IAP/190 IAD, shot down a Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa IJAAS fighter off the coast of North Korea.

The Soviet Air Force maintained large quantities of P-63 Kingcobras after the war, with P-63s remaining in service throughout the Korean War in the 1950's.

The French Air Force (Armée de l'Air) received 114 P-63 Kingcobras in 1945. These units were received too late to participate in World War 2, and they were first deployed to Algeria. When the French Indochina War broke out, the P-63s were sent to Indochina immediately. By January 1950, only 60 P-63s remained operational due to a lack of spare parts since the United States refused to provide them. The squadrons equipped with the Kingcobra began to receive the F8F Bearcat in February 1951, and the P-63 was taken out of service soon after. The last flight of a P-63 in Indochina occurred in September 1951.

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Bell P-63C-1/C-5 Kingcobra Army Fighter

The most advanced production model of the P-63. The P-63C had a more powerful engine, the Allison V-1710-117 (1500 hp), as well as a short-term water injection afterburner capable of boosting the engine to 1800 hp. The airplane's aerodynamics were changed: an additional fin was added under the fuselage. Other external differences included a carburetor intake and new truncated wings. The area of the stabilizers, however, was increased. Measures taken to eliminate the danger of the plane falling into a flat spin were not entirely effective; however, the plane did spin less dangerously than the P-39 Airacobra, without jerking and twisting the controls around. The plane's armament remained the same as on the A-9 and the A-10.

The P-63C fighter was produced in two major series. The C-1 series featured a multipurpose ventral pylon under the plane, similar to that of the A-1 and A-5 series, which could carry an extra fuel tank or a bomb. 215 of these airplanes were built.

The C-5 featured two additional pylons under the wings, similar to those of the A-6. So, the P-63C-5 could carry three 500-lb (227-kg) bombs or three extra 75-gallon (284-liter) fuel tanks, or a combination of the two.

The number of pylons was the only difference between the two series. The P-63C-5 became the largest series in the Kingcobra's production. By May of 1945, 1,012 planes had been constructed.

The Red Army Air Force's opinion of the P-63 was positive. Pilots noted the plane's high speed, good manoeuvrability, and powerful armament. The convenient three-wheeled chassis, coupled with efficient brakes, provided good conditions for taxiing, takeoff, and landing, and the plane's handling on the ground was excellent.

In World War II, the P-63 would only see combat in the USSR. In the short military campaign in the Far East in August 1945, the Japanese air force provided no serious resistance, so evaluating the Kingcobra's combat performance in air-to-air combat was not possible.

In all, 3,303 P-63 aircraft were produced, including all modifications. After the war, they remained in service with the Soviet Air Force until 1952-1953. In the U.S., all of the planes were officially retired in 1946.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!--''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.''-->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=p-63c-5 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|X2_yfdqtahc|'''(Arcade): P-63C-5 Kingcobra - The Finishing Touches''' - ''Paul Walsh''|Kx524F8dFKQ|'''P-63 C-5 Historical Gameplay''' - ''PhlyDaily''}}

== See also ==
<!--''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''-->

;Other P-63C-5:

* [[P-63C-5 (USSR)]]
* [[P-63C-5 (France)]]
* [[Kingcobra (USA)]]


== External links ==
<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/340956-p-63c-5/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]
* [http://www.aviation-history.com/bell/p63.html [Aviation-history<nowiki>]</nowiki> Bell P-63 Kingcobra] ([https://web.archive.org/web/20210419004548/https://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/js/r20210415/r20190131/show_ads_impl_fy2019.js Web Archive])

{{AirManufacturer Bell}}
{{USA fighters}}