{{About
| about = Soviet strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other variants
| link = Pe-3 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=pe-3_early
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

As with all Pe-2s and Pe-3s, the roll rate is great, but turn time leaves much to be desired. It is quite fast, and can outrun most fighters if downtiered.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,100 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 517 || 502 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 27.4 || 28.7 || 7.5 || 7.4 || rowspan="2" | 326
|-
! Upgraded
| 555 || 535 || 24.6 || 26.0 || 13.0 || 10.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 500 || 470 || 320 || ~10 || ~5
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 380 || < 380 || < 440 || > 307
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- 4 mm steel behind the pilot's butt
- 6 mm steel beside and below gunner
- 12 mm steel in front of gunner\*
- 13 mm steel below and behind pilot
- 45 mm bulletproof glass in front of pilot
- Self-sealing fuel tanks, with neutral gas pressurization system (3 in central fuselage, 4 in each wing)

<nowiki>\*</nowiki>Note, the gunner is rear-facing

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|Berezin UB (12.7 mm)|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 2 x 12.7 mm Berezin UB machine guns, nose-mounted (150 rpg = 300 total)
- 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, nose-mounted (450 rpg)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}

<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|RS-132|RBS-132}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

- Without load
- 2 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (200 kg total)
- 4 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (400 kg total)
- 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs + 2 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (700 kg total)
- 6 x RS-132 rockets
- 6 x RBS-132 rockets

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}

<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

- 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, dorsal turret (750 rpg)
- 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, tail turret (250 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The Pe-3 (e) can be used for a variety of roles, depending on what you are comfortable with. In Air RB, the aircraft can be used as a high-speed base bomber, or bomber interceptor. For base bombing, you can choose the heaviest payload (2 x 250 kg and 2 x 100 kg), and, once spawned in, go into a shallow dive towards the base you are going for. Once over the base, drop your payload and break away. Remember to set your bomb fuse to at least 2 seconds, or else you will blow yourself to bits. However, the Pe-3 (e) can also be used as a bomber interceptor, although this may be harder. While the Berezins and the ShKAS both have a high rate of fire, there is limited ammo, and you might not be able to down the bomber before your ammo runs out. Instead, rockets could be a much better choice. You can load 6 x RS-132 rockets, or 6 x RBS-132s. For bomber-hunting, the RS-132 will be better-suited, as it has more explosive filler (4.9 kg vs 1.5 kg). While it is harder to hit moving targets in the air with rockets, with practice, you will be able to down any bomber in your sights.

The Pe-3 (e) can also be used as an attack aircraft in Ground battles. The RBS-132 rocket can penetrate 85 mm of armour, which is enough to penetrate all tanks at this BR form the sides or back. Or, you can load bombs, and dive onto your targets.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- High speed
- Great roll rate
- Quite manoeuvrable
- Can carry bombs and rockets ( including powerful anti-tank RBS-132 rockets that can penetrate ''85 mm'' of armour!)
- Defensive ShKAS has a high rate of fire, and the Universal belt contains only incendiary tracers; can set any enemy on fire with careful aim

'''Cons:'''

- Low ammo count
- One 7.62 mm MG is rather ineffective against better-armoured fighters
- Turn time can't compete with anything
- Fuel tanks are scattered all over the wings and fuselage, allowing them to be easily hit by any attacking fighter

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Petlyakov Pe-3 Heavy Twin-Engine Fighter.

When the Great Patriotic War began in the summer of 1941, the Air Force of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army urgently needed a patrol/interceptor aircraft to fight the enemy's bombers and scouts. But with a war in progress, troops could only quickly receive a twin-engined fighter if it were based on some plane currently in production. The older Pe-2's fighter design fit this need perfectly.

In August 1941, the Petlyakov Design Bureau was instructed to design a fighter version of the Pe-2. The first prototype Pe-3 fighter, redesigned from the production Pe-2 bomber, series 16, flew for the first time on August 7, 1941. Only seven days passed between the order for the aircraft and its delivery for trials.

Structurally, the Pe-3 fighter differed from the Pe-2 in the layout of its forward and middle fuselage and its armament. Additional fuel tanks were put in the plane's fuselage, with one located in the bomb bay and two others replacing the gunner's cockpit. The plane was modified to be a two-seater.

The fighter had increased offensive armament. The nose weapon mount of the prototype Pe-3 model consisted of two 12.7 mm Berezin BK machine guns with 150 rounds each and one 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun with 450 rounds. The TSS-1 upper mount in the navigator's cockpit consisting of a 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun with 750 rounds was kept unchanged from the Pe-2. Since there was no one to provide fire from the lower rear of the aircraft, a fixed tail mount with a 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun with 250 rounds, which had been tested before on the VI-100 high-altitude fighter, was installed.

The plane's bombing armament was drastically simplified. Only four bomb racks remained from the Pe-2: two in the engine nacelle bomb bays and two (external) under the fuselage. The total bomb capacity was reduced to 400 kg for standard load and 700 kg (two 250-kg bombs and two 100-kg bombs) when overloaded. The brake covers under the wings were removed together with the gears, and, as a result, the ability to perform dive bombing was gone.

Production Pe-3s had the ShKAS nose machine gun removed, but the magazine capacity of the BK machine guns was increased up to 250 rounds each.

During armament testing of the nose mount, it was found that the Plexiglas fuselage nose section could not withstand the muzzle gas pressure, resulting in its destruction. Plexiglas was first replaced with duralumin and then with steel. The aircraft glazing was reduced when large observation blisters and the upper glass hatch of the gunner's cockpit were removed.

The heavy fighters were delivered from the factory to the front lines with equipment corresponding to the main production Pe-3 aircraft. The total number of Pe-3s built in 1941 was 196; 11 more planes were assembled from available stocks of parts in April 1942.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=pe-3_early Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|fMoZQTMk8vs|'''(Arcade): {{PAGENAME}} - Fits the Bill''' - ''tx141TX''}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

- ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
- ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

- ''topic on the official game forum;''
- ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Petlyakov}}
{{USSR strike aircraft}}
