{{About
| about = French twin-engine fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| and
| usage = other versions
| link-1 = Potez 631
| link-2 = Potez 633
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=potez_630
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} French twin-engine fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.73 "Vive la France"]].

The Potez 630 is best used as an energy fighter. This aircraft is a heavy fighter with a sluggish climb rate. While piloting this aircraft, you will want to stay down in the mid to lower altitudes and dive on targets from those areas. Attempting to climb and shoot will just cause you to be a slow and large target for someone to shoot at. After levelling off from a dive, the Potez 630 will start to lose the energy that was built up and will bleed energy even faster if the plane is taken into a vertical loop or a turn. The key is when reaching the bottom of your dive (whether you hit your target or not) you need to start to climb again in preparation for another dive to build more energy for another attack. If you find yourself low and slow, turn your plane away from the enemy and begin to climb.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 409 || 394 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 22.9 || 23.6 || 6.0 || 6.0 || rowspan="2" | 450
|-
! Upgraded
| 445 || 426 || 21.1 || 22.0 || 11.2 || 8.3
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 346 || 329 || 240 || ~10 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 360 || < 360 || < 330 || > 280
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* No armour plates or bulletproof glass
* Self-sealing fuel tanks: inner wings

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Hispano 404 (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm Hispano 404 cannons, chin-mounted (90 rpg = 180 total)

The cannons are arranged in the belly of the fuselage right under the pilot's seat. Each is armed with the same amount of ammunition, which means that all guns will fire together until empty.

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|MAC 1934 (7.5 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 7.5 mm MAC 1934 machine gun, dorsal turret (1,000 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The Potez 630 was developed to be a multi-role aircraft capable of control/direction, interception/bomber escorting and night fighting, however, it never really measured up to what was expected. This aircraft was originally outfitted with Hispano-Suiza engines (which the current 630 in the game utilises), however, due to problems and poor performance, the French later changed these engines out for Gnome-Rhone 14-cylinder radials. The Potez 630 in the game utilises the weaker Hispano-Suiza engines which in-turn explains why this aircraft has a poor climb rate and energy retention problems.

While the Potez 630 may be lacking in the power department, it does have a very streamlined fuselage and very responsive control surfaces which allow the aircraft to be quite manoeuvrable. Along with manoeuvrability, the 630 is outfitted with two belly-mounted 20 mm Hispano 404 cannons with 90 rounds of ammo each. These rounds can be depleted after about 7 seconds of continuous fire, so short and well-aimed shots should be made. There is a dedicated gunner at the rear which utilizes a 7.5 mm MAC 1934 machine gun. The Potez 630 does not have the option to mount any other weapons such as bombs or gun pods.

The Potez 630's main strength is its twin 20 mm cannons. If used sparingly, they can easily shred enemy bombers, even without modification. In air RB, it is best to immediately start a shallow climb to gain some altitude. Level off at about 3,000 m (10,000 ft.) and begin searching for enemy heavy bombers flying at your flight level or lower. Once you find one, head towards it until you start to follow it. Hold your fire until you are close enough to guarantee a hit. Open fire in short bursts to conserve ammo. The enemy won't last long against 20 mm rounds.

The Potez 630 is also equipped with a single dorsal gunner. While this may not sound like much, it is surprisingly accurate and can easily take down Bf 109s and Ju 87 Stukas that may be tailing you. What ever you do don't let them get under you, as your underside is undefended and fragile.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Not controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Very manoeuvrable for a heavy fighter
* Good cannon armament (against fighters, bombers, AAA and trucks)
* Starts with an air-spawn on all maps
* If used sparingly, the 20 mm cannons are lethal against any plane at this rank (especially large bombers)

'''Cons:'''

* Small amount of cannon ammunition; depletes in about 7 seconds under continuous fire
* Large target
* No armour, pilot and engines vulnerable to machine gun fire
* Sluggish climber, slow level flight
* Bad energy retention in turns and especially in vertical loops
* Engines prone to overheating when not using MEC

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The Potez 630 was a twin-engined heavy fighter designed and used by the French Air Force during the late 1930s and into the Second World War. Designed as a contemporary to the German Bf 110, the Potez 630 was designed for both day-fighter and night-fighter roles. The Potez 630 saw service during the late-interwar period and into the Second World War, where it proved to be quite ineffective due to its slow speed. After the fall of France, the Vichy french government continued using the Potez 630 for fighter duties; this would continue until mid-1942 when Germany seized all Vichy-French aircraft; the Potez 630 was subsequently relegated to second-line duties and failed to see frontline service for the rest of the war.

In 1934, the French Air Ministry issued a requirement for a new twin-engine heavy fighter, capable of both day-fighter and night-fighter roles. The resulting design became the Potez 630, which first flew in April of 1936 powered by two 580 hp inline engines. The Potez 630 would enter production in 1937, and the French Air Force received their first Potez 630s in early 1930. The Potez 630 also attracted considerable foreign interest, with countries including the Republic of China, Greece, Romania and Switzerland placing orders for the aircraft.

Following the outbreak of war, the Potez 630 was employed against German air units; it was at this point that the Potez 630 proved to be a highly-ineffective interceptor. The aircraft was slower than many of the German bombers that it was designed to intercept (i.e. the Ju 88) and much slower than German fighters such as the Bf 109 and Bf 110. Following the fall of France, Potez 630s were employed by the Vichy France air force and fought the Allies during Operation Torch; following the seizure of Vichy French assets in 1942, all Potez 630 aircraft were relegated to non-combat roles. In total, 88 Potez 630 aircraft were built.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=potez_630 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development
* [[Potez 631]]
* [[Potez 633]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://forum.warthunder.com/index.php?/topic/385889-potez-630/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance]

{{AirManufacturer Potez}}
{{France twin-engine fighters and attackers}}