{{About
| about = Soviet strike aircraft '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Su-2 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=su-2_m82
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet strike aircraft {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
The Su-2 (M-82) is similar to other single-engined strike aircraft and bombers of the battle rating in terms of climb rate and top speed. But the long wings and incredibly powerful M-82 engine gives it one of the best manoeuvring energy retentions at the battle rating, which combined with really good acceleration makes it feel worlds more nimble than other similar aircraft.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 5,850 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 464 || 446 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 26.9 || 27.7 || 6.8 || 6.8 || rowspan="2" | 380
|-
! Upgraded
| 516 || 486 || 25.6 || 26.0 || 13.3 || 9.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 394 || 340 || 340 || ~8 || ~4
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 280 || < 240 || < 500 || > 350
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 4 mm steel under dorsal gunner
* 8.5 mm steel behind pilot
* 10 mm steel in front of dorsal gunner's hands
* 10 mm steel beside dorsal gunner's legs
* 10 mm steel in front of ventral gunner (note that the ventral gunner is facing the rear of the aircraft)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 4 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine guns, wing-mounted (850 rpg = 3,400 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|FAB-50sv (50 kg)|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* Without load
* 4 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (200 kg total)
* 12 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (600 kg total)
* 4 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (400 kg total)
* 6 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (600 kg total)
* 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (500 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, dorsal turret (900 rpg)
* 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, ventral turret (900 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
This plane has decent armour that can stop anything with less power than a 7.62 amour-piercing round. The powerful offensive armament pours bullets at targets and is great at taking down planes and destroying SPAAs in mixed battles. This plane doesn't need air superiority to be effective however it is suggested as you can take more time in destroying ground targets using equipped ordnance.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

'''Pros:'''

* More powerful engine, resulting in excellent manoeuvrability and energy retention
* Has armour, unlike its [[Su-2 (Family)|predecessors]]
* Has a ventral gunner (better protected)
* Fast-firing offensive MGs

'''Cons:'''

* Higher BR means it is facing significantly tougher enemies compared to previous models
* Stock guns jam quite quickly

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Sukhoi Su-2 Short-Range Bomber with M-82 Engine

Development of the Su-2 continued after the start of World War II. Special attention was given to improving the aircraft's combat characteristics. The production model had its electric trigger control upgraded, four ShKAS machine guns were once again mounted in the wings, and the LU (MV-2) lower turret, with a 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun and a 500-round magazine capacity, was restored. The MV-5m turret (modified, with a larger continuous belt) was used as an dorsal defensive weapon. The magazine capacity was increased to 1,000 rounds.

Clusters of KMB-Su-2 bomblets were introduced for this series, allowing the bomber to prepare more quickly and easily for departure and allowing bomb bay space to be used more efficiently.

Eight unguided RS-82 or RS-132 rockets could be suspended under the Su-2, four on guide rails under each wing, even if bombs were also carried. At maximum load, the aircraft could take off with up to 8 FAB-100 bombs in the bomb bay and 2 FAB-250 bombs under the wings. Protective armour for the crew was also increased, especially for the navigator.

So that the flight characteristics of the aircraft would not suffer, the final production model Su-2 used a Shvetsov M-82 fourteen-cylinder double-row radial air-cooled engine with a maximum take-off power of 1,700 hp.

From the start of the war, the Su-2 was used on the front lines as a day bomber, a ground-attack aircraft, and a scout plane. Military units armed with the Su-2 fought in the Battle of Stalingrad in the autumn of 1942 and for the Kuban region in the spring of 1943.

Virtually all pilots who flew the Su-2 spoke of it very fondly. According to them, it was an undemanding, reliable warrior of the skies. Many times the planes returned with bullet holes or even parts of fins or rudders missing, but the maintenance personnel were able to repair them and send them into battle again a few days later.

Of those pilots who flew the Su-2 aircraft during World War II, 27 were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Mikhail P. Odintsov and Grigory F. Sivkov were awarded it twice.

The Su-2 bomber was used relatively little for a number of reasons. The Ilyushin Il-2 ground-attack aircraft was coming into operation and became the most popular multi-purpose aircraft of the Air Forces of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army. It replaced many functions of the Su-2 and was widely used in most military operations during the war.

Production of the Su-2 was discontinued in April 1942, and the plane had ceased to participate in combat units by the end of 1943. In all, 877 Su-2 aircraft were produced, including all variants.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=su-2_m82 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|UDvzWT2BSg4|'''The Shooting Range #28''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 03:22 discusses the Sukhoi Su-2.}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Sukhoi}}
{{USSR strike aircraft}}