{{Specs-Card
|code=tb_3_m17_32
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium gift rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It has been in the game since the start of the Open Beta Test prior to Update 1.27. It was given away as a reward vehicle for the 2013 [[wt:en/news/383--en|Winter Magic!]], the [[wt:en/news/2598--en|2014 War Thunder's birthday]], and the 2022 [[wt:en/news/7945-special-happy-anniversary-war-thunder-en|War Thunder's 10th Anniversary]] events. It could also be obtained on occasion, when it appears in the [[Warbonds]] shop.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 1,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 168 || 162 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 59.2 || 60.7 || 4.9 || 4.9 || rowspan="2" | 680
|-
! Upgraded
| 202 || 185 || 56.9 || 58.0 || 10.2 || 7.2
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| X || X || X || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || N/A || N/A || N/A || ~4 || ~2
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 300 || < 300 || < 300 || > 135
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- No armour
- Self-sealing fuel tanks (2 in each wing)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}

<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|FAB-500sv (500 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

- 24 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (2,400 kg total)
- 12 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (3,000 kg total)
- 4 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs + 4 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (3,000 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}

<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|DA (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

- 2 x 7.62 mm DA machine guns, nose turret (720 rpg = 1,440 total)
- 2 x 7.62 mm DA machine guns, dorsal (forward-facing) turret (720 rpg = 1,440 total)
- 2 x 7.62 mm DA machine guns, dorsal (rear-facing) turret (720 rpg = 1,440 total)
- 1 x 7.62 mm DA machine gun, 2 x underwing turrets (420 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

TB-3 is, in a nutshell, a typical heavy bomber, and a very heavy, very slow one at that. It packs a truly majestic payload of 3,000 kg of bombs, however, the problem is in getting this payload to its target. The maximum speed of TB-3 is less than 200 km/h and its flight will take a really long time during which the giant TB-3 will become a very easy and enticing target for all enemy fighters and even some bombers. All this combined with practically non-existent manoeuvrability makes this bomber a very vulnerable one and its pilots may consider themselves lucky if they reach the target - not mentioning the route back. However, the TB-3 is not at all defenceless. Five turrets with a total of eight 7.62 mm DA machine guns present quite an effective firepower - at least against fighters of the TB-3 age. When attacked, don't even bother with manoeuvres, man the turrets and open fire, it is the only hope of the TB. The effectiveness of the turret fire is multiplied thanks to one previously mentioned factor - very low speed. As the maximum speed of TB-3 is equal to a terminal speed of most of the fighters, these fighters will often have a hard time intercepting the TB, while the TB gunners will gain a great opportunity of hitting slowly approaching enemy planes. This tactics, however, doesn't work very well when attacked from below. In that case, pray.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Not controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Combined || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Large payload of up to 3,000 kg (6,613 lb) with different payload configurations, capable of destroying all bombing targets in a single run
- Adequate defensive firepower capable of fending off enemy fighters effectively
- Good damage absorption due to large size and strong construction
- Four engines at Rank I can allow for some to be knocked out without causing the plane to fall drastically
- Difficult to hit by fast Boom & Zoom interceptors thanks to its low speed
- Despite its low speed, not many planes are able to catch up to the TB-3 due to the altitude difference
- It never rips itself from a dive
- Surprisingly manoeuvrable for its size
- Gunners have plenty of ammo before reloading

'''Cons'''

- Very slow speed
- Very slow climb rate - the speed loss while climbing is very significant and can be deadly due to the low overall speed
- Almost no speed reserve for manoeuvring, especially apparent when landing
- There are no brakes, that you have to wait for the plane to glide to a full stop before rearming
- Basically incapable of manoeuvring when attacked - survival depends on turret fire
- Have no offensive armament and will require to slightly tip the plane forward for the turret to engage manually
- No armour protection for the crew or modules
- Large size makes large target for enemy fire, even flak
- While relatively safe from fast interceptor fighters, the TB-3 is very vulnerable to agile and manoeuvrable planes

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
A four-motor all-metal monoplane with fixed landing gear and a crew of 12. Designed in the AGOS department (Aviation, Hydroaviation and Experimental Construction) of the TsAGI (Central Aerohydrodynamic Institute) under the direction of A.N. Tupolev.

In February 1929, the UVVS and TsAGI signed a contract for the construction of a "Metal bomber-type aircraft with 2,400 hp engine output". The ANT-6 prototype model took its maiden flight on 20 March 1931.

Based on flight tests, the ANT-6 received the following appraisal: "Judging by all its flight characteristics, this aircraft is a highly advanced bomber, on the same level as the best foreign aircraft". In fact, no foreign bomber possessed the same collection of flight characteristics as the Tupolev at that time. It was the best of its class in the world.

The ANT-6 was recommended for series production and accepted into service with German BMW-VI engines. At the end of the 1920s, the USSR obtained a license for their production and organized their manufacturing at the Rybinsk engine plant under the designation M-17. The aircraft received the military designation TB-3 ("tyazhyolyj bombardirovshchik tretiy" or "third heavy bomber")

The TB-3 went into construction at the No. 22 aircraft plant in Fili – the only Soviet plant at that time experienced in working with duraluminum.

On 26 February 1932, the first serial TB-3 was rolled out of its gates. The aircraft was powered by four water-cooled V12 BMW-VI engines with a maximum output of 735 hp. After the license was obtained, the engine was refined for series production and received the designation Mikulin M-17.

The TB-3's artillery and firing armament included a front-mounted Tur-6 open turret containing two tandem 7.62 mm Degtyaryov DA machine guns (the tandem version was designated DA-2), two diagonally-placed upper Tur-5 open turrets behind the wing edge which moved from side to side, each with a DA-2, and two extensible B-2 turrets under the wings armed with a single DA on a pivot, for firing to the rear.

The DA machine guns were disc-fed. A standard disc contained 60 rounds. The underwing B-2 turrets had 420 rounds (7 discs) each. The DA-2 turrets had 1440 rounds (24 discs per tandem turret) each.

Its standard bomb load amounted to 2,000 kg. When overloaded (by reducing its fuel supply) the aircraft could carry up to five tons of ordnance.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=tb_3_m17_32 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|l8NJyFROYqY|'''The Shooting Range #22''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 03:14 discusses the TB-3.}}

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era

- [[F.222.2]]

== External links ==

<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

- [[wt:en/news/7272-tb-3-screenshot-competition-en|[News] TB-3 screenshot competition]]
- [[wt:en/news/742--en|[News] Flying Aircraft Carriers]]
- [[wt:en/news/404--en|[News] New special event aircraft XF5F-1 and TB-3!]]

{{AirManufacturer Tupolev}}
{{USSR bombers}}
{{USSR premium aircraft}}
{{Winter Event}}
