{{About
| about = Soviet bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Tu-2 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=tu-2_postwar_late
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet bomber {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.29]].

The Tu-2S-59 is an extremely versatile ground attacker, with a moderate payload better suited for destroying ground targets than bases. Although the tactics are different for arcade battles, in Realistic, the plane should be flown quite aggressively. It is recommended to equip the 4 x 500 kg bombs (or just two if the modules haven't been acquired yet) in order to destroy as many armoured foes as possible. Additionally, use a two-second bomb delay to allow ample time to escape the blast radius.

The defining feature of the Tu-2S-59 is its single defensive 20 mm cannon in place of the 12.7 mm machine gun found on the two older models. Other than that and its increased BR, there isn't much difference between this and the older [[Tu-2S]] and [[Tu-2S-44]]. See above for battle tactics.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 7,300 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 522 || 503 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 32.0 || 32.8 || 4.5 || 4.5 || rowspan="2" | 326
|-
! Upgraded
| 575 || 547 || 29.8 || 30.8 || 13.0 || 8.1
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 900 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 437 || 380 || 310 || ~8 || ~4
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 360 || < 360 || < 440 || > 302
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 15 mm Steel plate behind the pilot.
* 6 mm Steel plate to the left of cockpit dorsal gunner.
* 8, 15 mm Steel plates in front of the cockpit dorsal gunner.
* 12, 15 mm Steel plates in front of the rear dorsal gunner.
* 8 mm Steel plate under the ventral gunner.
* 12 mm Steel plate in front of the ventral gunner.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|ShVAK (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 2 x 20 mm ShVAK cannons, wing-mounted (150 rpg = 300 total)

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|FAB-500sv (500 kg)|FAB-1000 (1,000 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (500 kg total)
* 9 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (900 kg total)
* 2 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs + 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 4 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 1 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bomb (1,000 kg total)
* 1 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bomb + 2 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 1 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bomb + 2 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (2,000 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|B-20E (20 mm)|Berezin UB (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 20 mm B-20E cannon, rear dorsal turret (120 rpg)
* 1 x 12.7 mm Berezin UB machine gun, front dorsal turret (190 rpg)
* 1 x 12.7 mm Berezin UB machine gun, rear ventral turret (350 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Once spawned (~3,500 m), locate ground targets to engage. It is suggested to engage the targets farthest from the enemy's airfield in order to avoid detection. Attack pillboxes (light or heavy, it doesn't matter with 500 kg bombs) as these don't move. Only engage the AI tanks if there are no pillboxes, and if engaging the tanks, judge the speed of the tank column, and release the bombs, making sure to lead where the tanks will be as the bombs fall, not where they are in that moment.

When bombing anything, note that the center of the reticle should be aimed below the target by about a centimetre (looking at the screen). This will allow the bombs maximum precision. When releasing the two bombs from the bomb bay, hold the flight pattern for about 1/2 a second longer than normal to compensate for the opening of the bomb bay doors. Once the payload has dropped, begin attacking artillery and AAA guns with the 20 mm cannons. Fire in short bursts to conserve ammo, as the more of these light targets are destroyed, the better. Never attack light pillboxes with the frontal cannons! The ammo spent attempting to destroy these (~200 rounds) isn't worth it! Always attack lighter targets, or if the situation presents itself, enemy aircraft. Once the bombs and cannon ammo are/is exhausted, then high-tail it back to the airfield. Fully upgraded, the Tu-2S-59 can maintain ~450 km/h on the deck, no problem. Be careful upon landing, as the plane tends to stall at ~175 km/h. Rearm, and repeat!

====Specific enemies worth noting====
<!--Some concerning vehicles to worry about if playing this plane. (i.e. Japanese fighters will out turn you)-->
Unfortunately for the Tu-2S-59, it has a battle rating of 6.3. This is a double-edged sword, as on one hand, the Tu-2S-59 has to fight enemy jets, notably the Horten 229 and the Me-262, but on the other hand, these pilots are typically experienced and won't sacrifice their altitude for a ground pounding Tu-2. However, should the Tu-2S-59 be engaged, here are some suggestions per plane.

Do not engage a fighter on purpose, the following is only for defensive and survival reference.

[[Ho 229 V3|Horten 229]] - This plane is agile, fast, and dangerous, possessing a pair of Mk 103 cannons. When engaged with one of these planes, force a head-on pass if he is either below or on equal altitude as the Tu-2S-59. Once the pass has concluded, and if neither of the two are down, push the throttle to WEP and run. When the 229 turns to pursue, it ''will'' catch up. Use the defensive turrets at this point, as these are the Tu-2S-59's only hope for making it out alive. Aim for the pilot.

[[Me 262 A-1a|Me 262 A-1]] and [[Me 262 A-1/U4|A-1/U4 Pulkzerstorer]] - These planes are a tough opponent. They are fast and possess better armour than the 229, so the turrets are not going to be as effective in destroying these enemies. Again, if the enemy is below or on equal altitude as the Tu-2S-59, force a head on pass and run after it ends (if able). Use the turrets, but know that these planes are designed to be bomber-hunters, and are ruthlessly efficient in their task.

[[F-80A-5|F-80A]], [[F-80C-10|F-80C]] & [[F-84B-26]] - Although most matches with the Tu-2S-59 will be on the Berlin map, mixed battles and alternate history is always a possibility. For these planes, use the same tactics. Force a head on, and then run after. Use the turrets to attack them while withdrawing.

''Late War Props (Spitfire 24, Fw 190 D-13, F8F-1B, etc.)'' - These should never be ignored. If possible, run back to base and don't commit to a head on with props, as they have a little more time to aim their shots and steady their plane. Rely mostly on the defensive turrets if needed.

''Player-Controlled Flak (Kugelblitz, Crusader AA, etc.)''<br>
These are the bane of bombers (especially medium-sized ones such as the Tu-2S-59). When the tracers fly, don't risk a dive. Circle around or find some unsuspecting flanker that is outside the cover of these AAA guns.

====Counter-tactics====
<!--What to expect, if it would be in command of the enemy and how to counter it. (i.e. They will most likely BnZ, etc.)-->
If confronted with an enemy Tu-2S-59, initiate a head on pass ''but then pitch up and stall their plane out.'' Additionally, maintain a safe altitude and utilize Boom & Zoom tactics, but it is worth noting that the Tu-2 is able to turn adequately.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Fast, for a medium bomber
* High wing rip speed (over 700 km/h)
* Air spawn in RB
* Very easy to land and take off
* Decent payload
* Forward-firing ShVAK cannons, can be useful in a head-on engagement
* Not as vulnerable as other 4-engine bombers
* Twin tail design leaves little restriction on back gunners
* Decently agile for its size
* Can often put out fires in fuel tanks due to pressurized gas system
* Individual bomb drops, very effective in tank battles
* Engines can cool down even with a 100% throttle
* Can pretty much WEP indefinitely
* Just need to research one modification for all payload options
* Has a lot of unlockable camouflages

'''Cons:'''

* Only two bombs when stock
* Relatively small defensive armament
* Only one pilot and is not protected by armour from the front
* High-ish stall speed (175 km/h, more of a pain when taking off/landing)
* Although it is fast, everything else is faster
* Performance starts to degrade with altitude
* Low amount of cannon ammo (150 rounds per gun)
* Camouflages need to be unlocked by bombing bases at which it is not that effective compared to other nation's bombers

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Tupolev Tu-2S Front Line Bomber with M-82FN engines, later production and export series (NATO reporting name: Bat).

The last stage of the Tu-2S's full-scale production began in 1949. The bomber's defensive armament was upgraded yet again. Production planes continued to be manufactured with machine guns in manual turrets, which by the late 40s seemed an obvious anachronism.

In August 1948, a VEU-1 electric turret with a 20 mm Berezin B-20 cannon was tested on series 55 aircraft, and from the spring of 1949 on it was used in mass production. The VEU-1 replaced the VUB-68 upper defensive turret.

More powerful GSN-300 electric generators also began to be installed. In addition, a new fire suppression kit, an RSB-5 radio set and strong LFSV-45 retractable lights were added. Beginning with series 59, a Goodrich de-icing system was installed on the front edges of the wings, horizontal stabilizer, and fins.

The upgraded equipment increased the aircraft's weight. Consequently, its speed and service ceiling decreased.

In the spring of 1950, production of the Tu-2 was finally discontinued. The last series of planes were intended mainly for export, as the Soviet Air Force was switching to the Ilyushin Il-28 jet bomber. A total of 1,211 Tu-2s (including all variants) were produced during the post-war period of 1946 to 1950. Afterward, some previously built planes were updated. From 1948 on, TON-2 rear attack warning radars were mounted on some of the aircraft. The ASh-82FN engines were replaced on a mass scale with later series engines with improved reduction gear; radio altimeters and new radio sets were installed, as well.

During the post-war period, as the industry supplied the Tu-2s, practically all units of the USSR Air Force were rearmed, replacing their Pe-2s and any lend-lease bombers.

After the war, the Tu-2s were accepted for service with the Air Forces of Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, China, and North Korea. The Tu-2s of the Chinese Air Force took an active part in the Korean War of 1950-53.

The Tu-2 aircraft were withdrawn from service with the USSR Air Force by the mid-50s. Virtually none of them were serving by 1954. It was in the flight schools that the Tu-2s continued to fly: some Tu-2s were still active in training units as late as the early 60s.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=tu-2_postwar_late Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|gxIVvUZGptw|'''The Shooting Range #51''' - ''Pages of History'' section at 07:12 discusses the Tu-2.}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Tupolev}}
{{USSR bombers}}