{{Specs-Card
|code=xp-50
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|cockpit=cockpit_xp-50.jpg
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} American twin-engine fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.31]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

The XP-50 has great climb rate and acceleration, although it does tend to lock up at high speeds. It can easily maintain a 20-25 degree climb. Your engines will also commonly overheat, but they cool off relatively quickly. Low-speed manoeuvrability is excellent, especially when you have your flaps deployed.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 6,700 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 662 || 646 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 19.8 || 20.4 || 17.2 || 17.1 || rowspan="2" | 444
|-
! Upgraded
| 698 || 680 || 18.2 || 19.0 || 23.0 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 465 || 436 || 290 || ~11 || ~7
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 350 || < 400 || < 400 || > 300
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="3" | Compressor (RB/SB)
|-
! colspan="3" | Setting 1
|-
! Optimal altitude
! 100% Engine power
! WEP Engine power
|-
| 5,520 m || 2,200 hp || 2,398 hp
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}

<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

- 9.5 mm steel - bulkhead in front of the cockpit
- 9.5 mm steel - behind the pilot
- Self-sealing fuel tanks (1 below the pilot, 1 fuel tank behind pilot)

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}

<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->

{{main|AN/M2 (20 mm)|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

- 2 x 20 mm AN/M2 cannons, nose-mounted (60 rpg = 120 total)
- 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

== Usage in battles ==

<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

Its excellent climb rate and acceleration make this plane great for energy fighting. It won't be hard to get altitude advantage upon the majority of your opponents, which this plane can out-climb.

Use your climb rate to be the highest plane of the battle, unfortunately, this aircraft does not have WEP, as so, it is best to climb at a 20-25 degree angle to get to altitude. Your priority targets are the highest enemies where you can pick and choose and work your way down to lower aircraft as needed.

If you notice you were out-climbed, don't hesitate to roll away and climb more as a dive is a risky trade with this plane. If an enemy climbs to catch you, make a 90° climb at full power and when they start to stall, try to boom & zoom them. Use your acceleration and/or climb rate if someone gets on your six to lose them. If you do lose energy, do not worry. You turn extremely well at low speeds with your flaps out and will out turn most things you fight.

Make sure to have a disciplined and accurate fire, since you will quickly chew through the ammunition. While you may only have 120 rounds total of the cannon rounds, it doesn't take a lot of hits to knock out enemy aircraft. Your guns are extremely accurate and they are nose-mounted. Gun convergence can safely be set to 800 m, however, accuracy is best when close in, around 200-300 m. It is recommended to take Air Targets belts for the cannons and the Universal belt for the machine guns to maximize the damage output for air-to-air engagements.

When attacking bombers, try your best to stay away from the rear as that is a very dangerous spot for your aircraft to attack from. The engines can easily be damaged by gunners if the shots are aimed properly so try your best to attack from the top or bottom or even peel off if needed. This aircraft has poor fire extinguishing and flying with one engine can be dangerous.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>1 gear || Auto controlled
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===

<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

- Excellent climb rate
- Great acceleration
- Good manoeuvrability
- Powerful weaponry, thanks to the two AN/M2 cannons
- Good cockpit visibility
- The engine quickly cools down if you idle the power
- Good dive speed

'''Cons:'''

- Only 120 cannon shells and, once gone, only two .50 MGs
- No WEP available in RB/SB
- Manoeuvrability not as responsive during long steep dives (control surface compression)
- Fragile airframe
- No suspended armament

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Grumman XP-50 twin-engine army fighter prototype

Practically at the same time the XF5F-1 Skyrocket carrier-based fighter was being created, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation designers worked on the development of a promising interceptor, based on the XF5F-1, for the United States Army Air Corps. The prototype was given a company designation of Model G-46 and an army designation of ХР-50.

The USAAC issued an order for production of the new aircraft on November 25, 1939. Although the ХР-50 was similar to the XF5F-1 externally, a number of significant changes were introduced into the original layout. Unlike its carrier-based predecessor, the ХР-50 was not a low-wing but a mid-wing monoplane, the fuselage was significantly lengthened, the shape of the pilot's cockpit canopy was changed, and the tailplane span was reduced.

The plane was powered by two Wright XR-1820-67/79 Cyclone nine-cylinder, air-cooled engines, with a left- and right-handed reduction gear, producing a takeoff power of 1,200 hp. Due to the new engines installed, the shape of the nacelles and engine cowlings was changed.

The aircraft's armament included two 20 mm Hispano-Suiza AN-M2 cannons, with 60 rounds each, and two 12.7 mm Colt-Browning AN-M2 .50 cal machine guns, with 500 rounds each, mounted in the forward fuselage. In addition, the aircraft could carry two 100 lb (45 kg) bombs under its wing panels.

Instead of the XF5F-1's tail wheel, the ХР-50 had a nose landing gear. The plane's fuel tanks were self-sealing, and the pilot was protected just as he was in the Navy version, i. e. with the help of an armoured front bulkhead, an armoured backrest, and an armoured floor.

The XP-50 (Ser No. 40-3057) prototype got off the ground for the first time on 18 February 1941, with Robert Hall, a Grumman test pilot, at the controls. The test flights showed that the ХР-50 had a better controllability than the XF5F-1. In addition, the turbosupercharged engines ensured the ХР-50's much better characteristics at medium and high altitudes.

On 14 May 1941, during the 15th test flight of the ХР-50 prototype, the turbosupercharger of one of the engines was destroyed, the cause undetermined, and the turbine blades flying in all directions severed the line running to the hydraulic nose landing gear extension system.

Pilot Robert Hall successfully bailed out of the damaged vehicle. After the first prototype was lost, all work on the ХР-50 was discontinued.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=xp-50 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

- [[XF5F]]

;Similar airframe

- [[Ro.57 Quadriarma]]

== External links ==

<!--''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''-->

- [https://forum.warthunder.ru/index.php?/topic/120438-pasport-xp-50/ Official data sheet - more details about the performance (Russian Forum)]

{{AirManufacturer Grumman}}
{{USA twin-engine fighters}}
{{USA premium aircraft}}
