{{About
| about = gift Soviet bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Yer-2 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=er-2_m105_tat
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a gift rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet bomber {{Battle-rating}}. Though initially in the game pre-1.37, this plane was removed upon Update 1.37 due to being performance-wise identical to the [[Yer-2 M-105]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 429 || 414 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 48.0 || 49.0 || 7.9 || 7.8 || rowspan="2" | 1,800
|-
! Upgraded
| 463 || 445 || 46.1 || 47.0 || 11.6 || 9.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 556 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 447 || 418 || 270 || ~4 || ~3
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 290 || < 300 || < 270 || > 330
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

* 8.5 mm steel - pilots' seats
* 8.5 mm steel - in front of dorsal gunner

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|FAB-50sv (50 kg)|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|FAB-500sv (500 kg)|FAB-1000 (1,000 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

* 12 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (600 kg total)
* 12 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (1,200 kg total)
* 14 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (1,400 kg total)
* 4 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,000 kg total)
* 6 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,500 kg total)
* 4 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 6 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (3,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bombs (2,000 kg total)
* 2 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bombs + 4 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (4,000 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}
<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->
{{main|Berezin UB (12.7 mm)|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

* 1 x 12.7 mm Berezin UB machine gun, dorsal turret (400 rpg)
* 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, nose turret (500 rpg)
* 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, ventral turret (1,075 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Impressive bomb loadout options
* Gets a Long Range Bomber air-spawn at 4,500 metres altitude
* Ability to deal massive damage to the targets with its immense bomb-load
* Engine doesn't overheat easily when using WEP

'''Cons:'''

* Terrible climb rate for its BR
* Subpar speed for its BR
* Weak defensive armament
* Poor performance at high altitude
* Very easy target to be destroyed, littered with fuel tanks, and is an easy target in general
* Difficult to takeoff with larger bomb loads if with mostly stock performance

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Yermolayev DB-240 (Yer-2) twin-engine long-range bomber

A four-seat, all-metal monoplane with an inverted gull wing, a twin-fin tail, and a retractable landing gear system including a tail wheel.

This plane was designed by OKB-240, under the direction of V. G. Yermolayev. The DB-240 was based on the Stal-7 passenger aircraft designed at the Civil Air Fleet Research Institute under the direction of R. L. Bartini.

The DB-240 prototype got off the ground for the first time on May 14, 1940. Full-scale production of the aircraft, under the designation of Yer-2, was started in May 1941 at Voronezh Aircraft Factory No. 18.

Originally, the DB-240 was designed with the promising M-106 liquid-cooled engines in mind. However, the development of the M-106 took longer than expected, and the designers urgently had to revise the whole project since the M-105 engines were less powerful and designed for lower altitudes but had already been launched into full-scale production. This forced replacement of the power unit significantly reduced the DB-240's combat capabilities, since its speed and altitude were noticeably decreased.

Yer-2s of the first production series were equipped with 1,100 hp Klimov M-105 twelve-cylinder, V-shaped, liquid-cooled engines with three-bladed variable-pitch metal VISh-22Ye propellers.

The aircraft's defensive armament included three turrets. One 7.62 mm ShKAS belt-fed machine gun with 500 rounds was hinged in the navigator's nose mount just like it had been on the DB-3F. A Mozharovsky-Venevidov LU-MV-2 hatch mount was fitted in the lower rear hatch between the 18th and the 21st frames. The mount was retracted in the fuselage when in the travelling position or extended before firing. A 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun with an OP-2L optical sight and 1,075 rounds was mounted on a mobile carriage. The first production aircraft had Mozharovsky-Venevidov MV-3 turrets, with a 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun featuring an OPT-1 sight and 1,200 rounds. Then, heavy TAT-VT turrets started to be delivered, and the light MV-3 turret was replaced with a heavy TAT-VT aerodynamic turret featuring a 12.7 mm Berezin BT machine gun with 400 rounds.

The aircraft's bombing armament included two external Der-19-20 beams enabling it to suspend bombs weighing from 100 to 1,000 kg (FAB-100, FAB-250, FAB-500, FAB-1000, BRAB-220, BRAB-500, BRAB-1000, P-250). The fuselage bomb bay had inside a pair of KDZ-240 twin cluster bomb racks designed to suspend four FAB-250 or FAB-500 bombs, as well as four KD2-240 triple cluster bomb racks designed to suspend 12 FAB-50 or FAB-100 bombs. External suspension enabled the aircraft to carry two VAP-500 spray tanks or the same number of UKhAP-500 all-purpose chemical tanks to create smoke screens. Four ABK-240 bomb clusters could be suspended inside the bomb bay, with bomblets up to 15 kg or incendiary ampoules. The Yer-2's maximum bomb capacity for short distances was 4,000 kg (two FAB-1000s on the outside and four FAB-500s suspended inside).
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=er-2_m105_tat Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development
* [[Yer-2 (Family)]]

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Yermolaev}}
{{USSR bombers}}
[[Category:Hidden vehicles]]