{{About
| about = Soviet bomber '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = Yer-2 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=er-2_m105r_tat
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==

<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a gift rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet bomber {{Battle-rating}}. Though initially in the game pre-1.27, this plane was removed upon Update 1.37 due to being performance-wise identical to the [[Yer-2 M-105R LU]].

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}

<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 4,000 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 429 || 414 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 48.0 || 49.0 || 7.9 || 7.8 || rowspan="2" | 1,800
|-
! Upgraded
| 463 || 445 || 46.1 || 47.0 || 11.6 || 9.6
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| 556 <!-- {{Specs|destruction|body}} --> || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 447 || 418 || 270 || ~4 || ~3
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 290 || < 300 || < 270 || > 330
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.''

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Suspended}}

<!-- ''Describe the aircraft's suspended armament: additional cannons under the wings, bombs, rockets and torpedoes. This section is especially important for bombers and attackers. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|FAB-50sv (50 kg)|FAB-100sv (100 kg)|FAB-250sv (250 kg)|FAB-500sv (500 kg)|FAB-1000 (1,000 kg)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

- 12 x 50 kg FAB-50sv bombs (600 kg total)
- 12 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (1,200 kg total)
- 14 x 100 kg FAB-100sv bombs (1,400 kg total)
- 4 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,000 kg total)
- 6 x 250 kg FAB-250sv bombs (1,500 kg total)
- 4 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (2,000 kg total)
- 6 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (3,000 kg total)
- 2 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bombs (2,000 kg total)
- 2 x 1,000 kg FAB-1000 bombs + 4 x 500 kg FAB-500sv bombs (4,000 kg total)

=== Defensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Defensive}}

<!-- ''Defensive armament with turret machine guns or cannons, crewed by gunners. Examine the number of gunners and what belts or drums are better to use. If defensive weaponry is not available, remove this subsection.'' -->

{{main|Berezin UB (12.7 mm)|ShKAS (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is defended by:

- 1 x 12.7 mm Berezin UB machine gun, dorsal turret (400 rpg)
- 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, nose turret (500 rpg)
- 1 x 7.62 mm ShKAS machine gun, ventral turret (1,075 rpg)

== Usage in battles ==
''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Controllable<br>2 gears || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".''

'''Pros:'''

-

'''Cons:'''

-

== History ==

<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

{{break}}
{{Navigation-Start|{{Annotation|Archive of the in-game description|An archive of the historical description of the vehicle that was presented in-game prior to Update 1.55 'Royal Armour'}}|expand=true}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}
Yermolayev Yer-2 twin-engine long-range bomber with M-105R engines

Yer-2s of later production series had 1,100 hp Klimov M-105R twelve-cylinder V-shaped geared liquid-cooled engines.

This engine was specially created to be installed on bombers, and it differed from the M-105 in that it had a smaller gear ratio. Externally, M-105R engines differed from M-105s by having individual exhaust pipes instead of twin exhaust manifolds on the side cowlings.

The standard configuration of Yer-2s of later production series included a TAT-VT upper turret with a 12.7 mm Berezin BT machine gun. Instead of the LU-MV-2 hatch mount with a 7.62 mm ShKAS, the aircraft was given an LU-MV-2B mount with a 12.7 mm BT machine gun featuring a manual reloading system and fed from detachable magazines. The total magazine capacity was 240 rounds.

The Yer-2 bomber outperformed the DB-3F's maximum and cruise speed, as well as its flight range (with a normal combat load). In comparison to the DB-3F, the Yer-2 was easier to pilot. But the relatively low critical altitude of the M-105 engines meant that combat missions with the Yer-2 were very risky, since the chance of being hit by anti-aircraft gun fire or intercepted by enemy fighters was higher, and the plane was also more affected by weather conditions on its route.

In addition, the Yer-2 had unsatisfactory longitudinal and lateral stability, due to the large loads imposed on the aircraft's flight controls. The insufficient power of M-105 engines dramatically increased the runway length required for takeoff.

When World War II started, no Yer-2s yet served with the Soviet troops. The first bomber air regiment to use this aircraft was formed in August of 1941.

Yer-2 bombers flew their first sortie on August 10, 1941, when they participated in a raid over Berlin. Regiments armed with Yer-2s acted as day and night bombers on the Western Front. They bombed Polotsk, Minsk, Orsha, Vitebsk, Novgorod, and Smolensk. In November 1941, Yer-2s attacked Königsberg. Yer-2 bombers with M-105 engines fought until May 1942, but some machines were flown until late 1943.

The production of Yer-2s with M-105 engines was discontinued in September 1941. A total of 71 aircraft had been built.
{{Navigation-End}}

== Media ==

<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

- [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=er-2_m105r_tat Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==

<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

- [[Yer-2 (Family)]]

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

- ''topic on the official game forum;''
- ''other literature.''

{{AirManufacturer Yermolaev}}
{{USSR bombers}}
[[Category:Hidden vehicles]]
