{{About
| about = American twin-engine fighter '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = P-38 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=yp-38
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
|store=9503
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the aircraft, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the aircraft in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium gift rank {{Specs|rank}} American twin-engine fighter {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update "Raining Fire"]] when it replaced the [[XP-38G]] in the Gaijin store.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Avia-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the aircraft behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="70%"
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max Speed<br>(km/h at 7,012 m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
! colspan="2" | Turn time<br>(seconds)
! colspan="2" | Rate of climb<br>(metres/second)
! rowspan="2" | Take-off run<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB !! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 613 || 596 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}} || 24.0 || 24.9 || 10.7 || 10.7 || rowspan="2" | 380
|-
! Upgraded
| 659 || 635 || 22.0 || 23.0 || 16.7 || 13.5
|-
|}

==== Details ====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | Features
|-
! Combat flaps !! Take-off flaps !! Landing flaps !! Air brakes !! Arrestor gear
|-
| ✓ || ✓ || ✓ || X || X     <!-- ✓ -->
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="7" | Limits
|-
! rowspan="2" | Wings (km/h)
! rowspan="2" | Gear (km/h)
! colspan="3" | Flaps (km/h)
! colspan="2" | Max Static G
|-
! Combat !! Take-off !! Landing !! + !! -
|-
| {{Specs|destruction|body}} || {{Specs|destruction|gear}} || 566 || 495 || 250 || ~10 || ~6
|-
|}

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="4" | Optimal velocities (km/h)
|-
! Ailerons !! Rudder !! Elevators !! Radiator
|-
| < 380 || < 460 || < 500 || > 420
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Avia-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the aircraft. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical aircraft systems.'' -->

The pilot has moderate armour protection, but other modules are vulnerable; the critical modules have no armour protection, as the armour is focused solely on the pilot. Because the two engines are on either side of the pilot they could absorb several bullets for the pilot if the enemy comes from the side.

* 38 mm Bulletproof glass - Windshield
* 9.5 mm Steel - Behind pilot's head
* 6.5 mm Steel - Pilot's seat
* 6.5 mm Steel - In front of pilot
* Self-sealing fuel tanks

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Avia-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Avia-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the aircraft, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in a battle, and also what belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|M4 (37 mm)|M2 Browning (12.7 mm)|Browning (7.62 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* 1 x 37 mm M4 cannon, nose-mounted (15 rpg)
* 2 x 12.7 mm M2 Browning machine guns, nose-mounted (200 rpg = 400 total)
* 2 x 7.62 mm Browning machine guns, nose-mounted (500 rpg = 1,000 total)

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the aircraft, the features of using aircraft in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The YP-38 climbs just as well as a [[Bf 109 (Family)|Bf 109]], and can make use of a 20 degree sustained climb. However, it cannot turn fight and has quite bad yaw (most likely due to it being twin-engine and having small rudders). Overall, it has bad manoeuvrability, but good acceleration due to having two engines. Make use of the flaps accordingly and you will get better or at least decent mobility in below 190 km/h speed. Due to your good climb rate and slow agility, your best tactic is to hunt bombers. Usually, at this BR, bombers do not climb high or try to speed bomb, bringing them to a low final altitude. You can use your .50 cals and 7.92 mm MGs to shoot out their engines, but it is better to take careful aim and use the 37 mm as its HE shell is quite potent. Depending on armour, it can take 1 to 2, even 3 hits to rip a wing or the fuselage using the HE only belt. These shells have quite slow muzzle velocity compared to MGs but it is worth the time in practising to aim them well as it takes out fighters and twin-engine interceptors like the [[Bf 110 (Family)|Bf 110s]] or [[Me 410 (Family)|Me 410s]] with a single shot. Against other fighters, it is recommended to fly a Boom and Zoom tactic to any engagement you see fit.

=== Manual Engine Control ===
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan="7" | MEC elements
|-
! rowspan="2" | Mixer
! rowspan="2" | Pitch
! colspan="3" | Radiator
! rowspan="2" | Supercharger
! rowspan="2" | Turbocharger
|-
! Oil !! Water !! Type
|-
| Controllable || Controllable<br>Auto control available || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Controllable<br>Not auto controlled || Separate || Not controllable<br>1 gear || Not controllable
|-
|}

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good climb rate
* Equipped with a 37 mm cannon

'''Cons:'''

* Not very manoeuvrable

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the aircraft in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
After the loss of the XP-38 in 1939, the program still showed great potential and, on April 27, 1939 a Limited Procurement Order was placed for thirteen test aircraft. Given serials 39-689-701, the aircraft were designated model 122-62-02 and had many similarities to the final P-38G. Redesigned with Allison V-1710-27/29 (F2R and F2L) boasting 1,150 HP and also equipped with B-2 Turbo-Superchargers they featured Spur Reduction Gearing as opposed to the former Epicylical Gearing found on the XP-38. This caused the engines thrust line to be raised upwards, as well the propellers were ,Outward-Rotating rather than Inward-Rotating. (The port propeller rotated Counter-Clockwise when seen from the rear, and the starboard Clockwise). This gave much stability when firing the guns and allowed the aircraft to be a much more effective combat aircraft.

The aircraft's chin-mounted intake under the propeller spinner was also replaced by a pair of cooling intakes, as well as enlarged radiators on both sides of the tail booms. The armament was also revised, substituting two 0.30 in. machine guns with two of the four 0.50in. machine guns, and the 37 mm Browning M9 was exchanged for a 20 mm cannon. With all of the guns mounted in the nose, with the 0.50in. guns mounted above the 0.30in., some YP-38s were observed to have permanent gun enclosure tubes protecting the two 0.50in guns, with flush plates to cover the remaining gun ports. In reality, most of the YP-38s flew unarmed, and due to the structural redesigning, the aircraft was lighter than the XP-38 at 14,348 lbs.

On September 16, 1940 the first YP-38 took off with Marshall Headle at the controls, and in March 1940 the Army received it's first YP-38 for trials. With production severely lagging behind, all YP-38 aircraft weren't completed until June of 1941. The aircraft had a maximum speed of 405 mph, at 10,000 ft, and an altitude of 20,000 ft could be achieved in just six minuted from takeoff. With this, the aircraft was exceptional, but had a flaw not seen until it was too late.

The aircraft encountered problems in which, during trials, tail buffet was severe in High Speed Dives. This all came to a head on November 4th, 1941, when Lockheed test pilot Ralph B. Virden took off with the intent to put aircraft 39-689 into High Speed Dive tests. During a dive, the aircraft lost it's tail booms and impacted into the kitchen of a house in Glendale, California, killing Ralph and destroying the aircraft. The accident was initially falsely diagnosed as Elevator Flutter but was soon later solved by the addition of large Wing-Root Fillets at the points where the wings joined the fuselage. The new repair had to be done very specific and precise, as failure of a tight fit would severely impact flight characteristics.

=== Ralph B. Virden ===
Born 11, June 1898 in Audobon Township, IL, he was the second child of Hiram R. Virden, a farmer, and Nancy Carrie Ivy Virden. He attended Bradley Polytechnic Institute in Peoria, IL and, on 15, October 1918 at the age of 17, enlisted in the US. Army. With the end of WWI less than a month later, he was quickly discharged, and in 1919 he married Florence L McCullers. Having two children, Kathryn and Ralph Jr., Kathryn unfortunately having passed at the age of 10 in 1930.

In the mid-1920s, Virden flew as a contract mail pilot, holding pilot No. 628, and was employed by Gilmore Aviation and Pacific Air Transport, and for 13 years flew also as a pilot for United Air Lines. In 1939, having racked up over 15,000 flight hours, he was employed by the Lockheed Corporation as a test pilot. Now living in North Hollywood with his son, Ralph Jr., who was also employed at Lockheed, he would unfortunately lose his life in an accident on 4, November 1939 when the tail booms of his Lockheed YP-38 test aircraft, 39-689, separated from the aircraft during a high speed dive test over Glendale, California. Ralph Jr, after the death of his father, would go on to join the United States Navy in WWII.

=== Crash of 39-689 ===
On November, 4 1941, during a flight over Glendale, California, Lockheed Test Pilot Ralph B. Virden pushed the nose of aircraft 39-689 down to conduct a High Speed Dive test. While in the dive, the aircraft approached what today is known as Critical Mach Number, resulting is air-flow over the wings to reach Transonic speeds and forming shockwaves that interrupted lift causing a portion of the wing to stall. During the dive, the speed reached too great and, in turn, caused the tail booms to separate. Thereafter, the aircraft impacted the house of Glendale resident Jack Jensen at 1147 Elm Street, killing Ralph and igniting a fire. The tail was eventually located several blocks away.

Following the accident, Lockheed, the U.S. Air Corps, and the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics (NACA) undertook an extensive testing program for the P-38.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=yp-38 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|cCT7uPFabJ0|'''War Thunder - YP-38 "The 37mm Lighting!"''' - ''Bo Time Gaming''|w-wm2xukzOI|'''YP-38 Lightning Review''' - ''Jaguara333''}}

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the aircraft;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/news/features/history/p-38.html [Lockheed Martin<nowiki>]</nowiki> The P-38: When Lightning Strikes] ([https://web.archive.org/web/20210420152142/https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/news/features/history/p-38.html Web Archive])

=== References ===

* [https://www.456fis.org/P-38_HISTORY.htm A Brief History of the P-38 "Lightning"] ([https://web.archive.org/web/20210420152225/https://www.456fis.org/P-38_HISTORY.htm Web Archive])
* [https://www.thisdayinaviation.com/tag/lockheed-yp-38-lightning/ This Day in Aviation - Lockheed YP-38 Lightning Archives] ([https://web.archive.org/web/20210420152236/https://www.thisdayinaviation.com/tag/lockheed-yp-38-lightning/ Web Archive])
* [https://archive.org/details/PilotTrainingManualP38/page/n1/mode/2up/ AAF Manual 51-127-1 - Pilot Training Manual for the Lightning P-38]

{{AirManufacturer Lockheed}}
{{USA twin-engine fighters}}
{{USA premium aircraft}}