{{Specs-Card
|code=a_129_d
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of and the creation and combat usage of the helicopter, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the helicopter in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
After the upgrade of Mangustas to the CBT standard between 2001 and 2008 and operated during the second Gulf War in Iraq and Afghanistan from 2004 to 2006, the Italian Army decided to upgrade the A-129CBT with new avionics, systems and weapons one of these weapons was the F&F anti-tank missile SPIKE ER guided by the Rafael TOP LITE optic at the start of the launch and the consequent track of the SPIKE missile, with this upgraded version of the A-129, lost the ability to launch the TOW because of his new optic, the first AH-129D (D stands for Delta) were acquired in 2014 from the 5°Reggimento '''AVES''' ('''AV'''iazione dell''''ES'''ercito), in the same year a total of 32 A-129CBT were upgraded to the Delta Standard, the AH-129D was immediately deployed and remained in service Afghanistan until 2021 when the ISAF troops left the country. Nowadays, there are 32 AH-129D operative and 16 A129CBT for training.

The '''{{Specs|name}}''' introduced with the [[Update "Kings of Battle"|"Kings of Battle" update]], is the top Helicopter of the Italian Tree, the main difference between the AH-129D from the A129CBT is basically the armament, the Delta carry SPIKE ERs but no TOWs, which are F&F Missiles and tracks every type of target, and at the same time so when you launch 8 SPIKEs you can kill 8 target simultaneously thanks to the F&F feature of the SPIKE but the main problem of the SPIKE is the Speed, the rest of the helicopter stays the same as the A129CBT.

== General info ==
=== Flight performance ===
{{Specs-Heli-Flight}}
<!-- ''Describe how the helicopter behaves in the air. Speed, manoeuvrability, acceleration and allowable loads - these are the most important characteristics of the vehicle.'' -->
Outfitting the AH-129D with general payload options (Spikes,Hellfires, rockets, air-to-air missiles) does not make the helicopter any slower than its adversaries, in fact at times you'll easily be one of the fastest helicopters on the battlefield. The AH-129D is able to do manoeuvres other helicopters can only dream about, even with full payload options. In Ground RB matches however, there should not be many times you'll have to move too much to avoid enemies. You are able to get good positions thanks to your speed, and, if done right, you will be able to dodge incoming missiles from enemy SPAA or jet aircraft.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! rowspan="2" | Characteristics
! colspan="2" | Max speed<br>(km/h at _,___ m)
! rowspan="2" | Max altitude<br>(metres)
|-
! AB !! RB
|-
! Stock
| 269 || 253 || rowspan="2" | {{Specs|ceiling}}
|-
! Upgraded
| 319 || 295
|-
|}

=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Heli-Armour}}
<!-- ''Examine the survivability of the helicopter. Note how vulnerable the structure is and how secure the pilot is, whether the fuel tanks are armoured, etc. Describe the armour, if there is any, and also mention the vulnerability of other critical systems.'' -->
Unlike its the A-129 CBT, the AH-129D has access to the MAWS (missile approach warning system) which can be configured to activate together and automatically set off its counter-measures in game. Generally speaking however the AH-129D is not very survivable. Like many helicopters at its battle rating, it is prone to exploding into many pieces after a hit from a missile. It does have some armour on the cockpit area, but in battles that won't really protect you from anything you'll face. The AH-129D uses Kevlar boron carbide, a composite material which is limited only to instrument, floor and side panels around the cockpit. It does not provide the same level of protection as seen on other helicopters.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Heli-Armaments}}
=== Offensive armament ===
{{Specs-Heli-Offensive}}
<!-- ''Describe the offensive armament of the helicopter, if any. Describe how effective the cannons and machine guns are in battle, also what ammunition belts or drums are better to use. If there is no offensive weaponry, delete this subsection.'' -->
{{main|TM197B (20 mm)}}

The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' is armed with:

* A choice between two presets:
** 1 x 20 mm TM197B cannon, nose turret (750 rpg) + 90 x countermeasures
** 1 x 20 mm TM197B cannon + 90 x countermeasures + IRCM

=== Suspended armament ===
{{Specs-Heli-Suspended}}
<!-- ''Describe the helicopter's suspended armament: additional cannons under the winglets, any bombs, and rockets. Since any helicopter is essentially only a platform for suspended weaponry, this section is significant and deserves your special attention. If there is no suspended weaponry remove this subsection.'' -->
The '''''{{PAGENAME}}''''' can be outfitted with the following ordnance:

{{Navigation-Start|Default weapon presets}}
{{Navigation-First-Simple-Line}}

* Without load
* 28 x Hydra-70 M247 rockets
* 76 x Hydra-70 M247 rockets
* 2 x 12.7 mm FN M3P machine guns (250 rpg = 500 total)
* 2 x 12.7 mm FN M3P machine guns (250 rpg = 500 total) + 6 x FFAR Mighty Mouse rockets
* 4 x AGM-114B Hellfire missiles
* 8 x AGM-114B Hellfire missiles
* 4 x Spike ER missiles
* 8 x Spike ER missiles
* 8 x ATAS (AIM-92) missiles
* 8 x Mistral missiles

{{Navigation-End}}

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in a helicopter, the features of using the helicopter in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
''Describe the tactics of playing in a helicopter, the features of using the helicopter in a team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view, but instead, give the reader food for thought. Examine the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->
'''Pros:'''

* Access to SPIKE ER2 fire and forget anti-tank missiles
* Access to MAWS (missile approach warning system)
* Very good and in most cases, unmatched manoeuvrability
* Good speed
* Deadly 20 mm autocannon
* Can carry AIM-92 Stinger or Mistral air-to-air missiles
* Very effective anti-tank capabilities
* Has access to countermeasures and a ballistic computer
* Access to IRST auto tracker which is very effective against planes
* Has IRCM which prevents the stable lock of IR missiles without ECCM

'''Cons:'''

* Fragile, cannot tank as many hits as its counterparts
* Spike fire-and-forget missiles are extremely slow

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the helicopter in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The story of the A129 Mangusta "Delta", (also known as A129 ESS, AH-129D and A129 Mangusta) began during the late stages of the Cold War. The helicopter began to be developed at the request of the Italian Army, whom saw the need to equip its air units with a dedicated attack helicopter with anti-tank capabilities. The A129 was the first dedicated attack helicopter fully designed and built in Western Europe. Its project began in 1978 and its final project was ready only in 1982. The A129 made its first official maiden flight on the 15th of September of 1983, at the Agusta company Cascina-Costa facilities. The flight lasted about 30 minutes. Agusta pilots were extremely happy with the results, and went on record and said that the helicopter had great handling. They had previously only performed shake down flights twice prior to the first official flight. It was given the name Mangusta by the Italian army and Agusta employees. This name was mainly chosen due to the fact that the A129 was a direct competitor of the Bell A-1 Cobra that at that time rivaled the Agusta project. (The mongoose is known for its ease in killing poisonous snakes).

Agusta would continue to develop the A129 Mangusta and would see extensive service in the Balkans as part of the Italian peace keeping contigent for the NATO lead KFOR. It would also be used in Somalia, Iraq and Afghanistan. After the first A-129A's began being used in service, Agusta developed the A-129 International which was primarily made for export. In short during that era they didn't have a lot of luck but did use what they learned from the International by making what is known as the A-129 Mangusta "Combat" or "CBT" for short. The CBT was an updated version for the Italian Army, incorporating the same advances of the International version where the avionics and armament were modernized, the motorization however was kept original with Rolls Royce Gem 2-1004D's that produced a maximum unit power of 1120 HP. Years would pass and the CBT would require one final upgrade for it to remain in service, as such Agusta would once again be in charge and would look into what the Italian army would require.

After a lot of talk and design proposals, Agusta would finally come out with the A-129 Mangusta "Delta" also known as the AH-129D. The Delta variant of the Mangusta would be first presented in 2011. It would be highly advanced as it replaced the now out of service TOW anti-tank missile with the Israeli-made Spike fire-and-forget missile. The AH-129D variant also improved the avionics and optics of the Mangusta, incorporating the Rafael TOPLITE optic which offered not only better visibility but improved also in the zoom and thermal imaging department. The first user of the AH-129D would be the 5th regiment of the AVES (Aviazione dell’Esercito), Italy would go unto quickly use it in Afghanistan. What was discovered is that during its service there, the AH-129D would rack up more flight hours than its peers as according to pilots stationed there at the time, the Mangusta was better suited for this type of counter-insurgency role. As of now the Delta variant of the Mangusta is still very much in active service, but by 2027 the Italian army hopes that Leonardo will have begun to deliver the replacement of the Delta, known as the AH/AW-249 'Fenice'.

=== Devblog History ===
Following the introduction of the A129 CBT into service, Agusta continued refining the design of their light attack helicopter and quickly developed a successor model in the early 2010s — the AH-129D. Closely resembling the preceding A129 CBT, the new ‘Delta’ variant featured updated avionics and a new targeting system as well as improved structural strength through the use of more advanced materials. Crucially however, the updated electronics enabled the helicopter to be armed with the much more capable Spike ATGMs, which entered service with the vehicle in 2014.

Presently, the A129s in service with the Italian military are undergoing modernization programs to be upgraded to the latest ‘Delta’ variant of which several dozen vehicles have already completed this modification.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=a_129_d Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|aYYZFFfc_ic|'''Ultimate A-129 Mangusta Guide''' - ''Bob Dickinson''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the helicopter;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* [[A129CBT]]
* [[A-129 International (p)]]
* [[T129]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* [[wt:en/news/8531-development-ah-129d-mangusta-spiked-up-mongoose-en|[Devblog] AH-129D Mangusta: Spiked Up Mongoose]]

{{AirManufacturer Agusta}}
{{Italy helicopters}}