{{About
| about = Italian medium tank '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = OF-40 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=it_of_40_mk_1
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the description, the first part should be about the history of the creation and combat usage of the vehicle, as well as its key features. In the second part, tell the reader about the ground vehicle in the game. Insert a screenshot of the vehicle, so that if the novice player does not remember the vehicle by name, he will immediately understand what kind of vehicle the article is talking about.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Italian medium tank {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.85 "Supersonic"]].

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Tank-Armour}}
<!-- ''Describe armour protection. Note the most well protected and key weak areas. Appreciate the layout of modules as well as the number and location of crew members. Is the level of armour protection sufficient, is the placement of modules helpful for survival in combat? If necessary use a visual template to indicate the most secure and weak zones of the armour.'' -->
The OF-40's armour isn't great, but it certainly is in a way better than the Leopard 1's. The OF-40's turret has very weird angles, so you can bounce some incoming shots from there. The sides (excluding the spaced armour in the turret) are only 35 mm thick at most, so you can't rely on the armour as much as you could hope to compared to other tanks that fight at the OF-40's battle rating. The OF-40 has better protection when it comes to the front plate. It is 170 mm thick front-on. Other than that, its hull is very weak, so it cannot be completely relied on. Its survivability is average. In most cases, enemies will only manage to take out one crew member, the gunner and loader are quite spaced out between each other. The same cannot be said about the rest of the crew however. The OF-40 can and will take a hit and with smoke launchers it will survive better than most.

'''Armour type:'''

* Rolled homogeneous armour - Hull and turret
* High hardness rolled armour - Turret
* Rubber-fabric screens - Sideskirts

{| class="wikitable"
! Armour !! Front (Slope angle) !! Sides !! Rear !! Roof
|-
| Hull || 70 mm (68°) ''Upper Glacis'' <br> 50 mm (50°) ''Lower Glacis'' || 35 mm ''Top Crew Compartment'' <br> 25 mm ''Top Engine Compartment'' <br> 30 mm ''Bottom'' || 25 mm || 15 - 30 mm
|-
| Turret || 30 - 68 mm (various angles) ''Turret front''<br>30 mm (58°) + 45 mm (curved) ''Gun mantlet'' || Spaced: 30 mm + 80 mm air + 35 mm ''Forward''<br>Spaced: 12 mm + 120 mm + 35 mm ''Rearward'' || 30 mm || 20 - 40 mm
|-
|}
'''Notes:'''

* The turret sides use spaced armour, and are therefore stronger than they appear in the armour viewer.
* Beneath the angled outer portion of the gun mantlet is a curved 45 mm plate, which is hard to see in the armour viewer.
* There are 10 mm rubber-fabric screens protecting the upper suspension.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Tank-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the mobility of the ground vehicle. Estimate the specific power and manoeuvrability, as well as the maximum speed forwards and backwards.'' -->

{{tankMobility|abMinHp=1,286|rbMinHp=734}}

The OF-40 has great mobility, similar to the Leopard 1. It can handle off-road with an average speed of around 40 km/h. On flat surfaces, the OF-40 will reach around 60-65 km/h. It has great static mobility when spaded (not as great when stock). It can keep up with the light tanks and be one of the first to the capture point if you try hard enough.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armaments ==
{{Specs-Tank-Armaments}}
=== Main armament ===
{{Specs-Tank-Weapon|1}}
<!-- ''Give the reader information about the characteristics of the main gun. Assess its effectiveness in a battle based on the reloading speed, ballistics and the power of shells. Do not forget about the flexibility of the fire, that is how quickly the cannon can be aimed at the target, open fire on it and aim at another enemy. Add a link to the main article on the gun: <code><nowiki>{{main|Name of the weapon}}</nowiki></code>. Describe in general terms the ammunition available for the main gun. Give advice on how to use them and how to fill the ammunition storage.'' -->
{{main|OTO Melara 105/52 (105 mm)}}
The OF-40 features the 105 mm OTO Melara 105/52 gun, like the other OF-40s and the B1 Centauro. It is a potent main gun capable of displaying an excellent performance at its br. The gun is capable of firing the M456 HEATFS ammunition. Sometimes, the use of M392A2 is preferred for the higher muzzle velocity despite the significantly reduced penetration. Both projectiles are more than capable of engaging targets at far range using the potent zoom in main sights. With the laser rangefinder, getting into long range engagements turns to be extremely easy with almost pinpoint accuracy.

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="100%"
|-
! colspan="5" | [[OTO Melara 105/52 (105 mm)|105 mm OTO Melara 105/52]] || colspan="5" | Turret rotation speed (°/s) || colspan="4" | Reloading rate (seconds)
|-
! Mode !! Capacity !! Vertical !! Horizontal !! Stabilizer
! Stock !! Upgraded !! Full !! Expert !! Aced
! Stock !! Full !! Expert !! Aced
|-
! ''Arcade''
| rowspan="2" | 61 || rowspan="2" | -9°/+20° || rowspan="2" | ±180° || rowspan="2" | N/A || 19.0 || 26.4 || 32.0 || 35.4 || 37.6 || rowspan="2" | 8.71 || rowspan="2" | 7.70 || rowspan="2" | 7.10 || rowspan="2" | 6.70
|-
! ''Realistic''
| 11.9 || 14.0 || 17.0 || 18.8 || 20.0
|-
|}

==== Ammunition ====
{{:OTO Melara 105/52 (105 mm)/Ammunition|M392A2, M393A2, M456, M416}}

==== [[Ammo racks]] ====
<gallery mode="packed" widths="300" heights="300">
File:Ammoracks OF-40 Mk.2a (1).jpg|Ammoracks 1-9
File:Ammoracks OF-40 Mk.2a (2).png|Ammoracks 10-12
</gallery>
<!-- '''Last updated:''' -->
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! Full<br>ammo
! 1st<br>rack empty
! 2nd<br>rack empty
! 3rd<br>rack empty
! 4th<br>rack empty
! 5th<br>rack empty
! 6th<br>rack empty
! 7th<br>rack empty
! 8th<br>rack empty
! 9th<br>rack empty
! 10th<br>rack empty
! 11th<br>rack empty
! 12th<br>rack empty
! Visual<br>discrepancy
|-
| '''61''' || 55&nbsp;''(+6)'' || 54&nbsp;''(+7)'' || 47&nbsp;''(+14)'' || 46&nbsp;''(+15)'' || 39&nbsp;''(+22)'' || 38&nbsp;''(+23)'' || 31&nbsp;''(+30)'' || 30&nbsp;''(+31)'' || 23&nbsp;''(+38)'' || 20&nbsp;''(+41)'' || 16&nbsp;''(+45)'' || 1&nbsp;''(+60)''||No
|}

=== Machine guns ===
{{Specs-Tank-Weapon|2}}
{{Specs-Tank-Weapon|3}}
<!-- ''Offensive and anti-aircraft machine guns not only allow you to fight some aircraft but also are effective against lightly armoured vehicles. Evaluate machine guns and give recommendations on its use.'' -->
{{main|FN MAG 60-40 (7.62 mm)}}
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" width="50%"
|-
! colspan="5" | [[FN MAG 60-40 (7.62 mm)|7.62 mm FN MAG 60-40]]
|-
! Mount !! Capacity (Belt) !! Fire rate !! Vertical !! Horizontal
|-
| Coaxial || 4,000 (200) || 600 || N/A || N/A
|-
| Pintle || 1,600 (200) || 600 || -8°/+20° || ±120°
|-
|}

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the tactics of playing in the vehicle, the features of using vehicles in the team and advice on tactics. Refrain from creating a "guide" - do not impose a single point of view but instead give the reader food for thought. Describe the most dangerous enemies and give recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of the game in different modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The OF-40 cannot withstand a frontal encounter most of the time with most opponents due to the lack of a reliable armour, making the tank an easy prey for almost anyone on the battlefield when in urban combat. However, the tank comes with a great mobility, able to reach 65 km/h in RB (72 in AB), making it the ideal tank to shoot at the enemy and rapidly retreat to change position. The optics are better far more better than anything encountered at the battle rating, so it is ideal to use them alongside the laser range finder to play a sniping role. Its gun is capable of punching through most of enemy tanks, but caution is a must when uptiered: tanks like the T-62M-1 cannot be damaged in the turret even with HEATFS rounds.

The tank is not very suitable for urban combat, since it does not have a stabilizer and thus, reducing the chances be capable of landing the first shot, often knocking out the gunner, disabling the engine, the gun, or just setting the tank on fire. The best thing to do, in these cases, is to avoid the center of the map, flanking the enemy to hit him from the side and staying hidden from sight so enemies don't focus their firepower on the OF-40.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in a bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good main gun handling
* Has a laser rangefinder, making sniping much easier
* Spaced armour in the turret allows taking some autocannon hits, the mantlet are immune to HESH, and some AP shots bounce if the turret is angled
* Quick and agile tank when upgraded

'''Cons:'''

* No stabilizer
* Boxy shape makes both the turret and hull easy to hit, APHE shells can easily knock out 3 to 4 crew members
* Extremely thin side armour makes it vulnerable to any autocannon, even SPAA with stock belts
* Carrying more than 20 rounds puts ammo into the hull ammo rack, lowering survivability

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the vehicle in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the vehicle and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Vehicle-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the vehicle's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
After the end of WW2, the Italian industry completely stopped development and production of domestically designed tanks. During the Cold War, the Italian industry would produce armoured fighting vehicles for its own needs, however most of these vehicles were foreign designs built under license.

In the late 1970s, Oto Melara and Fiat began developing the first Italian post-WW2 tank, under a join private venture. As Oto Melara was already mass-producing the German Leopard 1 MBT under license for the Italian Army, its engineers possessed sufficient experience and know-how in order to develop their own tank.

The resulting vehicle, designated OF-40, turned out to be, somewhat unsurprisingly, very similar in design to the German Leopard 1 already in service with the Italian Army. Nonetheless, the OF-40 became the first domestically developed and produced Italian tank after WW2.

Despite the many similarities however, the Italian military proved reluctant in ordering the OF-40 for mass production. As a result of being unable to find a domestic operator, Oto Melara turned to the export market and soon found a willing buyer - the United Arab Emirates.

Shortly after, the OF-40 was upgraded to the Mk.2 version which, among other things, improved the vehicle's optics and rangefinder, added a two-plane stabilization system for the main gun, and an improved fire control system, allowing the vehicle to fire improved ammunition.

The OF-40 was only built in limited numbers and for a limited time, with the UAE being the only operator world-wide. The UAE still uses the OF-40 today, although in different roles, with proposals being made to convert the vehicle into a heavy IFV.

''- From [[wt:en/news/5938-development-of-40-mk-2a-made-in-italy-en|Devblog]]''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=it_of_40_mk_1 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Images
<gallery mode="packed-hover" heights="200">
File:OF-40 in Jungle.jpg|<small>The OF-40 in the jungle</small>
</gallery>

== See also ==
''Links to the articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the vehicles;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{TankManufacturer OTO Melara}}
{{Italy medium tanks}}