{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_kanonenboot_k2
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' was a K-class sloop built for the Royal Netherlands Navy to replace the aging Brinio-class gunboats. Originally seven ships were planned, but only three were laid down and two more ordered. By the time of the German invasion of the Netherlands, the ships were still incomplete and not yet launched. The K2 was laid down in 1939 and commissioned in 1942. Very little is known about her career except that she was hit by an aerial torpedo on 9th October 1944, heavily damaging her. She was towed to port and at the end of the war found in port of Horten, Norway. She was then towed to the Dutch port of Delfzijl where she sank by accident in November 1945. On 26th July 1946, she was raised and, after inspecting her, sold for scrap in 1947.

The K2 was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test. Unlike any destroyer or even some light cruisers, the K2 features 40 mm thick belt armour protecting magazines with 50 mm plates protecting vital machinery such as engine and fuel tanks. The turret ammo elevators are surrounded by 60 mm armour as well as the turret itself are protected by 60 mm thick armour all-round making them immune to auto cannon and lower calibre fire. The bridge is protected by 35 mm rolled homogeneous armour all around, again making it much more protected than any of its contemporaries. As the K2 was designed to serve in coastal waters, her max speed is only 34 km/h. The main armament of four 120 mm cannons is on par with destroyers of other navies.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

As the K2 is a frigate, it's important to note that it is not fast with a top speed of 34 km/h (AB:47 km/h) which makes it as fast as a Killer whale. Indeed, the K2, could be compared to a Killer whale!
It's not very fast, it can't manoeuvre very fast, it can't evade torpedoes at close range. However, it's very strong, with armour plates providing up to 60 mm of protection, and its Herculean size compared to other gunboats, it makes it look and feel very opposing. It packs a very almighty bite! With its two turrets carrying 2 x 120 mm L45 cannons, 2 x four-barrel Flakvierling 38 automatic cannons, 2 x 2 cm C/38 (20 mm) automatic cannons and 2 x 3.7 cm (37 mm) SK C/30 automatic cannons.

The storage for its ammunition is stored below the waterline, they are also encased by the fuel tanks which wrap around the sides behind the 60 mm thick armour plates, making torpedo strikes less likely to sink the ship, however, it is not impossible to be sunk by a single well-placed strike.
When playing this Herculean motorboat, sail towards the capture zone, do not head out to sea like a lone killer whale, because the K2 will be sunk, by enemy destroyers which prey on large slow ships, like this, for easy targets.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->

{{NavalMobility
|SpeedForwardStockAB = 30
|SpeedBackStockAB = 21
|TurnTimeStockAB = 146.017
|TurnSpeedStockAB = 21
}}

Its top speed of 34 km/h can be achieved within 18 seconds, which is very a great time to be under full-steam. Its top speed in arcade battles of 47 km/h can also be achieved within 18 seconds, not bad for a ship that displaces over 1,420 tons of water.

The manoeuvrability of the ship is like a killer whale, it's good, but it's not the best - it can make short sudden movements to dodge torpedoes only if they are coming towards the stern of the ship. Turning requires a large area to be completed, it's one of these ships where it's better suited to go in a straight line and stay in capture zones.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|L45 (120 mm)}}

The primary armament consists of four 120 mm L45 cannons mounted in two turrets, one front, and one rear. The turrets can turn 360 degrees, making changing broadsides easier. The shell selection is not a selection. You only have at your disposal a high-explosive round with 2.7 kg of TNT. The guns traverse at an average rate, but have a slow reload.

{{:L45 (120 mm)/Ammunition|120 mm HE}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|SK C/30 (37 mm)}}

The secondary armament consists of four 3.7 cm cannons, in two turrets, one front and one rear. They reload fast, at 30 rounds per minute. In terms of shells, you get a HE and an APCBC. APCBC should always be used, as it has both a higher explosive power, and higher penetration power. It is possible to hit and detonate the enemy ammo racks with these, especially the unprotected ammoracks most ships have for their rear turrets, above the waterline.

{{:SK C/30 (37 mm)/Ammunition|37 mm Spgr L/4.1 Lh 37, 37 mm Psgr L'spur Zerl}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 Flakvierling 38 (20 mm)|Hotchkiss (13.2 mm)}}

The AA guns are very good for a ship of it's size and tier. A total of 12 2 cm autocannons and 2 13.2 machineguns will provide very effective cover from enemy planes.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|WBD depth charge|WBG depth charge}}

There are depth charges and grenade launchers, which are somewhat needless, but provide a hazard of being detonated by enemy shots. It is best to not carry them.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The K2 excels in close-range combat, its L45 cannons rip apart enemy ships with well-placed shots, smaller lighter ships can easily be knocked out with a single hit directly on them. The Herculean size and armour of the ship allows it to  dish out blows and take some more, without much damage.

Critical hits will most likely cripple the ship, with areas not well armoured such as under and to the left of the stern, and the bow turret. HE rounds could cause the ammunition to detonate. The armour belt also extends just above the waterline, which means that sailors can be knocked out easily with AP or HE rounds. Along with this, if the turrets are knocked out, you'll most likely be easy picking for torpedo boats and other warships.

Another thing to keep in mind when playing the K2 is to avoid long-range engagements, as the poor manoeuvrability and low speed can make you get picked off early in the match. This is why it's important to stay focused on what threats are appearing in the combat zone. Some notable threats to it are bombers, destroyers, torpedo boats and light cruisers. To stay combat effective for as long as possible, be sure to make use of the game's A.I. system to make the AA independent so that it can engage small surface ships and air targets.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Dual-mounted 120 mm cannon located in each turret, you can land more shells and with more accuracy
* 120 mm rounds offer great damage when hitting targets
* Heavily armoured, below the belt
* Good anti-air capabilities

'''Cons:'''

* Low rate of fire, long reload times with the fastest reload time being only 6.3 seconds
* Only has two turrets, and conscious enemies will focus on knocking these out first
* L45 cannons only have HE rounds, No AP or other rounds possible
* The armour is only located around and on the: belt, bridge & turrets
* Slow 24 km/h, (15 mph) stock, increases the vulnerability of being hit by torpedoes or bombs
* Outclassed by other vehicles close to its battle rating, such as [[SKR-7]] or [[Ognevoy]]
* It is regularly pitted against much faster and larger destroyers

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The K-class gunboats were ordered as a replacement to the outdated Dutch Brinio-class gunboats that preceded them. Originally, seven ships of the class were planned to be constructed, three of which were ordered and laid down right away. However, the German occupation of the Netherlands in 1940 abruptly ended the construction of the already laid down ships, with pending orders for the remaining ships getting cancelled. Following the occupation, all three uncompleted warships were captured after falling into German hands.

The Kriegsmarine decided to continue construction and to complete all three of the captured warships for use in the German war effort. Thus, the K-1, K-2 and K-3 were all subsequently completed by 1940/41 and were put into commission with the German navy by 1942. The three gunboats primarily saw service in Norwegian and German waters, performing patrols and other low-profile missions. K-1, the lead ship of the class, was sunk right at the end of WW2 in 1945 off the coast of Denmark. The К-2's back of the deck was damaged by a torpedo during another air attack of the allies. The vessel had been towed back to Germany but was never repaired till the end of the war. After the war she was towed to the Netherlands where it sunk for unknown reasons, it was raised from the seabed and scrapped in 1946.K-3 was the sole survivor of the class, being recommissioned into Dutch service after WW2 under the name "Van Speijk". K-3 remained in Dutch service until 1960, after which she was sold for scrap.

''- From [[wt:en/news/5612-fleet-development-kanonenboot-k-2-the-dutch-conscript-en|Devblog]]''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_kanonenboot_k2 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/5612-fleet-development-kanonenboot-k-2-the-dutch-conscript-en|[Devblog] Kanonenboot K-2: The Dutch Conscript]]

{{ShipManufacturer Gusto}}
{{Germany frigates}}