{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_escort_typem1943
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} German sub-chaser {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update 1.83 "Masters of the Sea"]] with the fleet release into Open Beta Test.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

The {{PAGENAME}} is a very large craft with relatively little armour for its size. Each of the 105 mm gun mounts are in a casemated shelter with 8 mm of anti-fragmentation armour. Both 37 mm FlaK C/36 mounts are protected by 8 mm hardened steel armoured gunshields, with the 20 mm mountings all having 12 mm hardened steel gun shields. Hull-wise, the M-802 is much more lacking, featuring 10 mm rolled homogeneous armoured plating only around the bridge and boiler-room.

The M-802 features a crew complement of 107 sailors, which allows the vessel to take a battering from normal munitions with relatively little issue, though fires and explosions will quickly cause crew to die. With its torpedo tubes, depth charges, and ammunition racks being entirely unarmoured, these fires and explosions can occur quickly aboard vessels with foolhardy commanders, leading to rapid sinking of the vessel due to hull breaches and crew loss. The guns, while susceptible to larger calibre munitions, will usually survive being targeted by PT boats, as their spacing across the ship makes them relatively difficult to completely disable.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
Being a coal-fired vessel, the M-802 is relatively slow in its course. With a maximum speed of 31 km/h in a straight line, and 821 tonnes of displacement to contend with, the ship is not quick to accelerate or come to a stop. Its base rudder turning time of 5.4 seconds also leaves much to be desired in its turning, with course correction often involving 3 point turns compared to the PT boats it spawns near.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|SK C/32 (105 mm)}}

The {{PAGENAME}} is equipped with a primary armament of two 105 mm SK C/32 cannons. With 100 shells per gun for a grand total of 200 rounds aboard the ship, and access to 2 types of HE and a time-fuzed HE shell, they are effective anti-PT boat weapons. Fights against destroyers are also possible with these weapons, though care is needed to avoid their return fire.

With a four-second reload on such a large calibre munition, an 8°/s traverse rate, and access to high explosive with base fuse ammunition, hits to most non-destroyer vessels will cause massive damage, often times instantly destroying a compartment and occasionally knocking out PT boats with a single shot. Mounted fore and aft aboard the vessel, their firing angles are superb for all forms of engagement, and ballistic performance is par for the course for the 105 mm guns in-game.

{{:SK C/32 (105 mm)/Ammunition|10.5 cm Sprgr. L/4.4 Kpf.Z, 10.5 cm Sprgr. L/4.4 Bd.Z, 10.5 cm Sprgr. L/4.4 Zt.Z}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)}}

The M-802's secondaries are its two 37 mm FlaK C/36 mounts, fore and aft on the superstructure. Mounted above and behind the main guns, one in front the bridge and one behind the funnel, with good firing arcs, these guns make quick work of PT boats and incoming aircraft at medium to close ranges. Letting the AI control them is usually sufficient for most situations, though manual control can be taken to dispatch pesky enemies getting too close for comfort with more speed than trying to rotate the main guns. Though access to mainly HE and mainly APT belts is available, the default Universal belt offers a good balance of the two shells and is the primary ammunition of choice for these guns.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''37 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm APT clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-I, AP-T}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 Flakvierling 38 (20 mm)}}

Strung along the top of the bridge and tail-end of the superstructure, the M-802's anti-aircraft armament consists of 20 mm FlaK38 mounts. Featuring one Flakvierling above and amidships of the rear 105, and two double mounts atop the bridge, the 20 mm have full coverage of the ship, though all 3 cannot be brought to bear on any target but aircraft above the vessel. There are no customizable belts for these guns, though manual control of the Flakvierling will still remove all but armoured PT boats at any range below a kilometre nearly instantly. Against aircraft, the true effective range is under 2 km when controlled by the AI gunners.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)|WBG depth charge}}

Being a sub-chaser, the M-802 does have access to two 533 mm G7a torpedoes, though they are fixed in position in two deck-mounted tubes firing to either front side of the ship. With a maximum speed of 56 km/h in the water and a 14 km range, they are effective against destroyers and cruisers, and their 280 kg charge of SW39a deals a significant amount of damage on a hit.

The M-802 is also equipped with depth charges as a supplicant to its torpedo armament. 4 WBG depth charges with 100 kg of TNT apiece are mounted on launchers to either side of the rear 37 mm, with 2 firing to each side. Their high weight means they land relatively close to the vessel, meaning they are only effective at destroying torpedoes approaching amidships or PT boats making close runs against the side of the vessel.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

Being such a large vessel with a PT boat spawn, and at a relatively high BR for PTs, the {{PAGENAME}} makes itself a massive target for 40 mm gunfire from opposing vessels, which can quickly incapacitate the ship and detonate its ammunition stores. As such, playing the M-802 with a mind towards solid cover is an absolute must. Hiding behind island tips with the 105 mm guns exposed allows for protection of the ammunition and torpedo launchers, preventing easy kills for the enemy. Her strong secondary and anti-air armament means that planes are of relatively little threat, provided you keep an eye to the sky and engage them when spotted. The AA and secondary guns also allow for last minute countering of PT boats that managed to sneak up on you., which can happen quite often with the M-802's low speed. If possible, avoid bringing the torpedoes and depth charges into any serious matches, as though they can be useful in certain situations, their high likelihood of detonation leaves little point in the tradeoff outside Enduring Confrontation matches.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->
'''Pros:'''

* Adequate armament including multiple 2 cm Flakvierlings and two hard-hitting 105 mm cannons
** Highly-effective anti-aircraft suite that is ideal for closer ranges (below 2 km)
* Multi-compartment design prevents quick sinking to small calibre fire
* Good survivability for a ship of its size, with a large crew count
** Engine compartment is protected by armour and coal bunkers, meaning that it is hard to knock out
* Can carry torpedoes to deal with heavier targets which it cannot outgun
* Coastal fleet spawn means can get into combat with smaller vessels faster than previous spawn location.

'''Cons:'''

* Survivability is compromised by the unarmoured hull and open gun mounts, which offer little protection
** Crew complement is used up in relatively exposed positions
* Incredibly slow, with a top speed of just 26 km/h in RB - this boat will take a while to get anywhere!
* AA suite is composed of small-calibre weapons which are ineffective at longer ranges
* Relatively small main armament (two guns) means the ship will be outgunned by most ships at its BR (including many destroyers)

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The "{{PAGENAME}}", really the Minensuchboot (Minesweeper) 1943, was a class of minesweeping sub-chaser developed by the German Navy as a simplified but enlarged version of the Minensuchboot 1940. Featuring a unique design of hull and improved firepower over its predecessor, the 1943 proved to be an effective vessel, with some remaining in service into the 1960s.

Designed around simplifying production, construction of the 1943 was not limited to shipyards entirely. The design of the vessel called for 8-10 pieces of hull that could be created in regular factories and transported by train to a shipyard, where final assembly would commence. From these pieces, the 7 segments of the boat would be constructed and finally fitted out. Due to this construction method, the 1943 only took an average of 8 weeks to completely construct, and was done so at a much cheaper cost. Final fitting out was completed in the Rostock and Koenigsberg shipyards exclusively. Of the 18 vessels built, all were coal-fired due to lack of oil for other types of boilers, though some were converted to oil firing postwar in their other roles.

Though some were sold to civilians postwar, to be used as ferries and trawlers, 1 was retained by the German Navy and received periodic upgrades before being scrapped. The remaining vessels went to the British and Americans as war plunder and were scrapped soon after.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_escort_typem1943 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{ShipManufacturer Schichau-Werke}}
{{Germany sub-chasers}}
{{Germany premium ships}}