{{About
| about = Italian motor torpedo boat '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = other versions
| link = MAS 500 (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=it_mas_classe500_3_1944
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The MAS 561 was a motor torpedo boat ('''M'''otoscafo '''A'''rmato '''S'''ilurante) of the MAS 500 class whose purpose was to attack enemy ships, and anti-submarine and escort operations. Built in 1941 with the others of the 3rd Series, the MAS 561 in particular was captured during the 1943 armistice of Italy by the Italians of the RSI (Italian Socialist Republic) i.e. the allies of Germany before the end of the war, and modified to add two [[Breda-SAFAT (12.7 mm)]] single mount machine guns, to increase its effectiveness against enemy Allied boats and to be used as anti-aircraft against enemy aircraft. Eventually, it was taken by the Germans and sank with its entire crew on 23 April 1945.

Introduced in [[Update "Raining Fire"]], the MAS 561 replaced the old reserve boat ([[MAS 555]]). It is the first Italian coastal ship you will play, and thanks to its speed you will be able to approach enemy ships quickly and launch torpedoes or depth charges causing serious damage to the enemy ship or its direct destruction. The armament consists of two 12.7 mm and one 20 mm guns, giving you good firepower against coastal boats. However, it is very fragile to enemy hits having little armour and a small crew.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
This ship has the entire hull made of wood, more precisely 40 mm of wood for the hull and 15 mm for the superstructure. Against all expectations, this wood is much more effective than one might think, in fact as a reserve boat the MAS 561 is one of the most resistant to damage. It can withstand rounds up to 20 mm, although after 20 mm it will only take a few moments to sink. There are 15 sailors, which may seem few but are enough compared to the 6 members of the [[G-5]] and 7 of the [[LS 3]]. The advantage of having a relatively small ship and many members is that it will not take long to repair and extinguish fires on the ship.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
The MAS 561 is propelled to a speed of 80 km/h thanks to 2 engines of 500 horsepower. The peculiarity of the MAS is that its 2 engines are civilian engines, not special engines for the armed forces. These two engines are also capable of going to -33 km/h.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|20 mm/65 Breda (20 mm)|Breda-SAFAT (12.7 mm)}}

The primary armament is composed of two 12.7 mm and a 20 mm, thanks to its 2 x 12.7 mm machine guns MAS 561 can cause serious damage in a short time to enemy ships, while the 20 mm causes little damage and has a very low rate of fire.

; 20mm/65 Breda

* Universal: {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T*|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer (self-destroying)}}
* HE belt: {{Annotation|HEFI-T*|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer (self-destroying)}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T*|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer (self-destroying)}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T*|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer (self-destroying)}}{{-}}  {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}
* AP belt: {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T*|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer (self-destroying)}}

{{:20_mm/65_Breda_(20_mm)/Ammunition|HEFI-T*, API-T}}

; 12.7mm Breda-SAFAT

* Universal: {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AI|Adjustment incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|Ball|Omni-purpose}}{{-}}{{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}
* Incendiary: {{Annotation|I|Incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|I|Incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}
* AP belt: {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}

{{:Breda-SAFAT (12.7 mm)/Ammunition|IAI naval, AP-T naval, Ball naval, AI naval, API-T naval, I naval, AP naval}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|W.200/450X5,75 (450 mm)|B TG depth charge}}

The MAS 561 is equipped with two types of additional armament. The first one is the W.200 torpedo, a torpedo that can navigate up to 81 km/h for 3 km. With the torpedo mode modification, the torpedo will lose 7 km/h but in compensation it gains 1,000 m of range. These torpedoes are excellent for quick attacks on larger ships. With their good speed and 200 kg of explosive, it will be child's play to sink a ship.

The second additional armament of the MAS 561 is the B TG depth charge, two of these charges can be equipped and being positioned in the back of the ship will be easier to use. The B TGs with their 60 kg of explosive each are very effective to destroy ships that get a little too close, you can also flank the big ships and throw them at them.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
To engage other small ships, it is better to maximize your firepower shooting from the side so you can use the machine guns and the 20 mm cannon at the same time.

To engage strafing aircraft, move in the same direction as the aircraft, lock the target, go to the gun sight view and lead your fire to the engine of the plane or cockpit if its a twin-engine plane. Once you destroyed it, or if you are not able to hit it, change direction with a sharp turn to avoid their return fire, as the plane is usually not as manoeuvrable as the boat.

To engage larger ships, you should use islands as cover to hide from their fire. It is useful to think a route to your target or destination (capture point, ambush position, etc) right from the start having all the present cover of the map and allies into account. To attack, you must get as close as possible to the target without getting destroyed. To do this, you must make sure the large ship is engaged in a firefight with another ship. Hold your fire to remain undetected and sneak to your target at high speed. Once you are close enough to launch a torpedo, launch them and get back behind cover as fast as possible using a smoke screen or terrain to conceal your escape.

The MAS 561 is a rather odd ship, despite being the reserve ship equipped with the largest calibre armament, its rate of fire and small magazine, as well as its inability to fire directly forward, drastically limit its potential. However, it can still be a significant threat to other ships. The best strategy when using the cannon is not to sail forward, but to turn your back on the enemy. This way you can use the full operational area of the weapon while exposing little of the hull, which increases the ship's survivability by a few crucial seconds. The best way is to stay behind cover and only move backwards when engaging and then return to cover. One-on-one combat against almost any other reserve will not work in your favour, so the element of surprise is very important.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pro:'''

* Good top speed - 80 km/h in RB, 112 km/h in AB
* Good turn time (~20 seconds AB/RB)
* Good torpedoes (speed 74 km/h, range 4 km, explosive mass 200 kg)
* Good acceleration
* Good armament: two 12.7 mm machine guns and one 20 mm cannon
* Effective 12.7 mm machine gun

'''Cons:'''

* No armour
* 20 mm has small magazines and slow rate of fire (~3 seconds for reload after 12 rounds)
* Terrible survivability (compared to other ships)
* The 20 mm cannon is positioned at the back
* Angle of fire of the 20 mm cannon only 270°, the cannon can't shoot towards the front of the ship
* No anti-aircraft protection
* Aircraft can strafe the ship and knock it out with a few well placed shots.

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
{{main|MAS 500 (Family)#History|l1=History of the Velocissimo Classe 500}}

After the armistice announced by Pietro Badoglio, 8 September 1943, the various military forces of the Kingdom of Italy were divided, and in 23 September 1943, Mussolini succeeded in founding the RSI (Italian Social Republic) and founded a new military corps to counter the Allies who continued to advance into Italy. In particular, the MNR (National Republican Navy), the fascist navy of the RSI, put into service former ships of the Regia Marina, one of which was the MAS 561. It was scheduled to be transferred to the Adriatic Sea, but was not carried out.

Later it was put into service, but before service in the MNR it was modified with the addition of two [[Breda-SAFAT (12.7 mm)|12.7 mm Breda-SAFAT]].

Later the MAS 561 was renamed SA 16 for German purposes.

On 23 April 1945, the MAS 561 sank with its entire crew.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Images
<gallery mode="packed-hover" heights="200">
File:MAS 561 media 1.png|
File:MAS 561 media 2.png|
</gallery>

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{ShipManufacturer Cantieri Navali Baglietto}}
{{Italy boats}}