{{Specs-Card
|code=ussr_mpk_163
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet sub-chaser {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] along with the initial Soviet naval tree.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

The MPK-163 has the following structural layout:

* Hull: 8 mm, steel
* Superstructure: 4 mm, steel

Armour on this ship is largely non-existent. The only armour to be found is on the gun turrets, and maxes out at 12 mm, meaning anything larger than 7.7 mm in calibre will punch through at nearly any range. The crew is thankfully plentiful and well-spaced throughout the ship, meaning you can tank a couple of hits before a total crew loss is observed. Engines are easily damaged and have a tendency to lead to fires aboard the ship. Ammunition stowage is decently protected, though remains vulnerable.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->

Straight-line speed is excellent when spaded; this vessel is capable of reaching 71 km/h in Arcade Battles, easily capable of outrunning stock S-boats. For its size, the boat is extremely fast and somewhat manoeuvrable, however like its predecessor, the length of the boat makes it difficult to navigate in shallow waters or tight corridors, and stopping distance is also an issue.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: {{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose. -->
{{main|90-K (85 mm)}}

The MPK-163 carries a single 85 mm 90-K cannon as its main armament. The 90-K is a decent main weapon with a moderate fire rate of 17 rounds per minute (3.5-second reload). The weapon itself is decent against larger ships, but lacks lethality against faster vessels and aircraft due to its lower fire rate (compared to the ship's 70-K autocannon).

The gun has access to three main shell types - the O-365K high-explosive (HE) shell, the O-365M time-fused (HE-TF) shell, and the BR-365 armour-piercing (APHEBC) shell. Of these rounds, the HE is almost always the best against enemy boats as it has the most explosive filler, and consequently, does the most damage. The HE-TF round is slightly worse as it detonates on a timed fuse, meaning the accuracy of the shell depends on crew skills. Finally, the APHEBC shells are rarely usable due to their low damage potential, only being useful against armoured targets like the soviet armoured boats. For good measure, bring mostly HE shells, and a bit of HE-TF and APHEBC shells just in case the situation arises.

{{:90-K (85 mm)/Ammunition|85 mm O-365K, 85 mm BR-365, 85 mm O-365M}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|37 mm/67 70-K (37 mm)}}

The secondary gun is a 37 mm 70-K gun with a high rate of fire for its calibre and is most effective as an AA gun, and should be left as one unless pesky patrol boats manage to surpass your large primary, then switch to this gun to take care of them quickly, as this gun has an exquisite firing arc on your boat and a good turn rate. It really isn't effective against other sub-chasers of your size.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}

{{:37 mm/67 70-K (37 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP-T}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control Select anti-aircraft weapons. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section. -->
{{main|DShK (12.7 mm)}}

The MPK-163 also carries 3 twin DShK machine gun mounts. The 12.7 mm DShK machine gun is a heavy machine gun, similar to the M2 Browning used by the Americans and the Vickers guns used by the British. This gun fires from a fixed 50-round magazine and will need to be reloaded after the magazine is expended. The gun itself is rather mediocre, and will struggle to hit targets reliably at ranges exceeding 1.5 km. However, at shorter ranges, the weapons can be highly lethal to small vessels or aircraft. The 12.7 mm machine guns do not get access to any ammunition belt upgrades - the default one is the only belt available.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|BB-1 depth charge|RBM mortar}}

The RBM mortars launch explosive projectiles about 36 m to the side of the ship, perpendicular to the ship's axis. The mortar charges are a proximity weapon and explode on impact. 

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB). -->
The MPK-163 is a very versatile large coastal vessel with adequate survivability, mobility, and armament. This ship can be played as a "gunship" utilizing its heavy armament, or alternatively, be used to capture bases relying on its mobility and decent survivability.

The MPK-163 is a very well-armed vessel at its BR, and you should take advantage of this strength. The vessel's strongest armament is the 37 mm 70-K autocannon mounted at the rear of the ship. Therefore, it is advisable to switch to manually control this weapon and use it to shred any coastal vessels that you might face. However, the 37 mm has a very slow traverse speed along with the 85 mm whilst stock, so it is advised to get the traverse upgrades after essential modules have been acquired. When fighting other sub-chasers or large vessels, use the 85 mm cannons, since it takes about 3-4 shot in some cases to destroy them. 

In general, the ship can be played using ambush or flanking tactics. Use islands and ground cover to hide your ship from enemy fire, and destroy any ships that sail into your line of fire; alternatively, flank the enemy and mow them down. Try to keep your broadside on the enemy vessels, as you can bring more guns on target. The MPK-163's overwhelming gun armament ensures that you can easily destroy any vessels or aircraft that you see. The 85 mm main gun is less effective against fast targets and should only be used against survivable, large targets such as the American SC-497. The DShKs are effective against ships and aircraft alike, but given that the 37 mm autocannon is more lethal, it is advisable to leave them under AI control.

The MPK-163 has two other favourable characteristics: good mobility and survivability. The ship can reach a top speed of 82 km/h in arcade and 49 km/h in realistic, which means that you can reach capture points quickly. Additionally, the ship has a crew count of 60 men, which means that your ship can take a couple of hits before going down. Utilize the good mobility and survivability to capture bases if your team's MTBs cannot capture them; again, shred any ships that come into your line-of-fire using your main armament. When capturing bases, be aware of enemy torpedoes, as the MPK-163 is a very large target. A single torpedo hit is almost always lethal.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Fast for a ship of its size
* Effective cannon
* Good secondaries and AA guns for its battle rating
* Lots of spaced-out crew
* Surprisingly good flanker with its heavy weapons and decent speed

'''Cons:'''

* Reload on the main cannon is mediocre at best
* Large target
* Poor steering
* Has a habit of igniting easily
* The RBM mortars have limited firing angles.

== History ==
<!-- Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History) and add a link to it here using the main template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <ref></ref>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <references />. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under === In-game description ===, also if applicable). -->
The Pr.122bis, MPK-163 was a ship of the [[MPK Pr.122bis]] class (NATO designation: Kronshtadt class) with modified main armament. Commissioned in the 1950s, the Kronshtadt class served as border patrol vessels and were also capable of anti-submarine duties. MPK-163 was a unique member of the Pr.122bis class armed with one less 37 mm 70-K autocannon - her counterpart, the Pr.122bis, can be found in the Soviet coastal forces tech tree as a gift premium vessel.

In the late 1940s, the Pr.122bis or Kronshtadt class were developed as a 300-ton displacement small submarine chaser class for the Soviet Union's fleet, though they were substantially larger than wartime ship classes such as the MO-4 and OD-200 classes. The ships displaced 325 tons full load and had a crew of 50, though the MPK-163 had two more crew members and displaced 380 tons full load. Standard vessels were powered by three 1,200 hp diesel engines, though the MPK-163 had the centre diesel engine exchanged for a 1,000 hp gas turbine engine. This addition resulted in the fitting of a second funnel behind the first one, giving the ship its unique appearance compared to other vessels of its class.

The MPK-163 was also equipped with an 85 mm main cannon and three dual DShK heavy machine gun mounts. It also equipped a single 37 mm 70-K anti-aircraft cannon, which differed from the other ships of the class, as the Pr.122bis ships carried two 70-K AA guns. As a submarine chaser, the MPK-163 was capable of fitting depth charges or naval mines. In total, 236 Pr.122bis vessels were produced, though the MPK-163 is a unique vessel among the Pr.122bis class. The MPK-163 entered service in December 1955 as the last ship in the Pr.122 class with hull number 673; after 14 years of service, it was retired in April 1970.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=ussr_mpk_163 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wikipedia:Kronshtadt-class_submarine_chaser|[Wikipedia] Kronshtadt-class submarine chaser]]

{{USSR sub-chasers}}