{{Specs-Card
|code=uk_higgins_78ft_mtb422
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium gift rank {{Specs|rank}} British motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update "Winged Lions"]] as a reward for [[Battle Pass: Season VI, "Firepower"]] and returned as one of the random rewards in [[Battle Pass: Season XVI, "Skilled Marksman"]].

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
The MTB-422 lacks any dedicated armour on the entire vessel. This results in exposed modules, such as turrets, being knocked out easily. The ammunition is also all stored above the waterline, meaning ammunition detonations are relatively common. This can be mitigated slightly by angling the vessel.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
The MTB-422 is quite quick to accelerate thanks to its three 4,500 shp Packard W-14 M2500 gasoline engines powering three shafts. The top speed of the vessel is 74 km/h which is competitive for its BR and allows it to quickly reach cap zones. The manoeuvrability of the MTB-422 is provided by a pair of rudders, which allow for tight turns in littoral environments.

Overall, MTB-422 excels in environments with cover, in which it can fully utilize its ability to speedily flank and attack the enemy from the side or behind.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

Being a premium vehicle, the MTB-422 comes with all modifications unlocked.

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)}}

The main armament of the MTB-422 is a single 40 mm Bofors L/60 Mark 3 cannon mounted near the stern of the vessel. This cannon allows the vessel to punch above its weight class, as it is capable of putting down heavy Russian gunboats such as the [[Pr.1204 late]] or even the [[MBK-161 late]]. The 40 mm has a choice of three different belts available to it.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''40 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}

{{:Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)/Ammunition|HEFI-T, AP-T}}

It is recommended to mostly bring HE belts, as most opponents will not have the armour to require the use of AP. However, captains should still bring at least some AP belts, as armoured gunboats tend to resist the 40 mm HE quite effectively.

It should be noted however that since the gun is on the stern of the vessel, the entire boat must turn to get the gun on target.

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II (20 mm)|AN-M2 (12.7 mm)}}

The secondary armament of the MTB-422 consists of one 20 mm Oerlikon autocannon and four 12.7 mm AN-M2 heavy machine guns in two twin mounts. The secondary armament both supplements and improves the primary armament by sheer volume of fire. The amount of lead that can be sustainably output by the autocannon and machine guns can easily destroy exposed modules and other parts of enemy crafts. The 20 mm autocannon gets a selection of three different belts to choose from:

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''20 mm HE:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''20 mm AP:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP-T, HEF-I}}

It is recommended to use the HE belts as they have the most post-penetration damage potential.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|Mk.VIII (533 mm)}}

The MTB-422 is equipped with two [[Mk.VIII (533 mm)|Mk.VIII]] torpedoes on either side of the bridge and angled slightly to the left and right respectively. These torpedoes have a warhead with 327 kg of TNT, which is middling for most torpedoes. They travel at 84 km/h with a 4.57 km range without the torpedo mode modification installed, and 76 km/h with a 6.4 km range with the modification installed.

Overall, these torpedoes can easily one shot destroyers and seriously damage cruisers. It recommended to not use the torpedo mode modification as most engagements will be within the 4.57 km range and the added speed reduces the opponent's chance to evade.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Overall, the MTB-422 can be used as a hit-and-run style of gunboat. The mobility and manoeuvrability allow it to reach a capture point, capture, and then escape to set an ambush for boats trying to recapture the point. In an uptier, it is recommended to try to sneak around the map to capture points and perform torpedo runs on unaware destroyers. In a downtier, the boat may be played much more aggressively, as the 40 mm cannon will shred low-tier coastal vessels with just a few shots. It should also be mentioned that it makes an excellent addition to a high tier naval lineup as it is a great coastal vessel to capture points in before spawning in larger capital ships.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* The 2 x 12.7 mm AN-M2 MGs and the 20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II cannon are in the same firing group
* Powerful combined broadside capable of dealing with most opponents
* Sheer volume of fire can often overwhelm opponents
* Torpedoes can cripple larger warships with a single hit

'''Cons:'''

* The 40 and 20 mm cannons have poor field of fire, limited to only side and rear
* Inadequate armour results in damage being taken easily
* Low crew count

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

=== [[wt:en/news/7520-development-battle-pass-vehicles-mtb-422-en|Devblog]] ===

The PT-92 torpedo boat was built in the USA at the end of 1942 at the Higgins Industries shipyard in New Orleans, LA, amongst the bulk of the sister 78-foot boats she was intended for Lend-Lease delivery to the Soviet Union. Due to the cancellation of the spring convoy in 1943, the boat went on to serve in the Royal Navy, where she received the hull number MTB-422. Here the boat was used in combat operations in the Mediterranean until the end of World War II. After the war, the boat returned to the United States, where she served at least until the mid-1950's; the further fate of the boat  is unknown. The boat was finally decommissioned from service late in 1985.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|WlS7yspnciI|'''Battle Pass: Firepower''' discusses the {{PAGENAME}} at 01:20 - ''War Thunder Official Channel''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/7520-development-battle-pass-vehicles-mtb-422-en|[Devblog] Battle Pass vehicles: MTB-422]]

{{ShipManufacturer Higgins}}
{{Britain boats}}
{{Britain premium ships}}