{{Specs-Card
|code=ussr_od_200
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} Soviet motor gun boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] when the Soviet fleet was implemented into the game.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
OD-200 has the following structural layout:

* Hull: 40 mm, wood
* Superstructure: 15 mm, wood

The OD-200 lacks any armour protection other than two 10 mm plates protecting the AA gunners. All critical components are situated in the rear half of the ship. Both fuel tanks and one of the ammo storages are clustered at the very back, with the other ammo storage and both engines located below the secondary armaments. This leaves the front hull empty and as such, hits to it will be rather inconsequential. The crew of 21, grouped mostly in and under the bridge, is in line with the average crew size of similar MGBs; however, it's much more vulnerable in comparison due to the complete absence of armour.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->

{{NavalMobility
|SpeedForwardStockAB = 51
|SpeedBackStockAB = 16
|SpeedForwardStockRB = 44
|SpeedBackStockRB = 14
}}

Although not terribly slow, the OD-200's speed is nothing to brag about, reaching a maximum of only 52 km/h after upgrades are purchased. The OD-200 has a displacement of 47.5 tons.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|37 mm/67 70-K (37 mm)}}

The 37 mm main armament on the OD-200 is very powerful in the fact that it is rapid fire and can obliterate small boats with its armour piercing belt rounds. The ammo capacity is quite good at 1,000 rounds. You won't be reloading or running out of ammo quickly. The clip reload is unbelievably fast for how much ammo it has, which makes from changing from HE to AP a breeze. It is hard to overheat the weapon, but just keep in mind not to hold down for too long. This weapon can also double as an AA gun with its rate of fire, but it is recommended to only use it manually, as the AI gunners will fire the gun until it overheats if given the opportunity. The stock rotation is not as fast as one would expect, but after upgrades it is snappy and can easily catch speedy patrol boats off guard.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}

{{:37 mm/67 70-K (37 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP-T}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|DShK (12.7 mm)}}

The anti-air armaments of the OD-200 consist of two 12.7 mm DShK machine guns. These guns should be used primarily against the aircraft, which are relatively easy to take down at this BR, but they can also be used against the lightly-armoured boats that are still present at this battle rating (such as the LS 3). The guns are positioned in the middle section of the ship, meaning that at least one gun can be placed onto an enemy aircraft at all times.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}
* '''12.7 mm HE belts:''' {{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}
* '''12.7 mm APIT belts:''' {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|IAI|Immediate-action incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}

{{:DShK (12.7 mm)/Ammunition|AP-I naval, API-T naval, IAI naval}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|BB-1 depth charge}}

Once the Depth Charges modification is purchased, the ship can be equipped with twelve 165 kg BB-1 depth charges, which is plenty considering it only takes a few to completely destroy a destroyer. They can get you out of a tough situation if you find yourself in proximity to an enemy ship.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The ships is not a main line ship and its uses may vary on the map, opponents, and team, but most of the time the roles are flexible.

Always utilize the 37 mm as the primary weapon as it is the most versatile weapon in the ship, the other one being the DShK machine guns which are only capable of crippling light armoured vessels and low flying aircraft. The moderate fire of the 37 mm is capable of crippling most of the vessels it will face with a couple of belts due to the ammunition it uses. Damage to hull may vary by the type of armour it is facing, the type of ammunition and the distance. An AP shell may not have the same crippling power to a lightly armoured vessel compared to HE, but HE might not be able to penetrate a certain vessel due to its armour whereas AP can. For this reason, it is recommended to carry universal belts, as it is a 1:1 ratio between AP and HE.

Despite how good the 37 mm might be compared to the DShKs in crippling power, its placement makes it tricky for the captain to use. It has a 360° traverse, but depression is restricted in a 30° cone, where the gun is not able to point down. This makes the ship only being able to open fire to enemy ships when they are facing them sideways or from behind. The 12.7 mm DShKs, on the other hand, have an unrestricted 360° traverse and elevation. The ship also has access to depth charges for use against submarines, which are not present in-game. Its use against ships is really situational. It is recommended not to carry depth charges as they work as an external ammo rack which can be blown out, causing a hull break, as well as increasing the ship's repair cost. When the situation to use depth charges is there, remember to always set a fuse greater than 3 seconds so that you can drop, move and stay out of the blast zone. Depth charges are dropped in pairs from the aft.

The OD-200 should be used in the following ways to achieve the greatest rewards:

'''Support:'''

The ship has enough firepower to cripple most ships at its battle rating. Let heavier armour ships take the damage while you assist them in sinking the enemy.

'''Anti-air:'''

The ship is pretty decent in the anti-aircraft role, mainly due to the semi-rapid fire 37 mm cannon and its 360° traverse. In addition with the 12.7 DShK guns, it is able to fight planes in a short-mid range, using the 37 mm for mid-range and the DShK for short range. HE belts are recommended for this role.

'''Fast attack craft:'''

Due to its speed (53 km/h), it is able to do strike runs when rushing capture points. The DShKs are able to take out light armoured vessels and low flying aircraft. The 37 mm should be used to destroy medium armoured vessels at point-blank when needed or at range.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Strong primary cannon with a high rate of fire and very slow to overheat
* Primary cannon hits extremely hard and can take down aircraft with a single hit
* Two powerful secondary machine gun turrets, each protected with 10 mm armour
* 21 crew members give decent crew survivability for a ship at its BR

'''Cons:'''

* Not very fast for a low rank ship
* Primary cannon cannot fire forwards except at high elevations
* Machine guns are mounted on beam mounts, reducing their firing angles
* Wooden hull can catch fire easily
* No protection to the ship's vital components

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The OD-200 was a class of small submarine chasers built during the latter part of the Second World War. Built as a replacement for the D-3 and MO-4 class MTBs and submarine chasers, the OD-200 class were built as both submarine chasers (OD-200) and motor torpedo boats (TD-200), the main difference being the fitting of torpedo tubes on the latter variant. As well, ships of the class were built with both wooden and metal hulls, depending on variant. The OD-200 class entered service between 1943 and 1945, supplementing the prior MO-4 class; all vessels were retired by the early 1950s.

As the successor class to the prior MO-4 class of small submarine chasers, the OD-200 class was improved in numerous aspects, notably armament. The ship was fitted with a single 37 mm 70-K autocannon with 500 rounds, instead of the MO-4's two 45 mm cannons. The 37 mm cannon proved more versatile in anti-aircraft duties, making it the preferred main armament. As well, the OD-200 class ships were fitted with two dual 12.7 mm DShK machine gun mounts. Some vessels were fitted with a 25 mm 84-KM autocannon, but this addition is not present on the version in-game. The OD-200 class was also capable of carrying depth charges to fulfill the antisubmarine warfare role.

The OD-200 class was fitted with two lend-lease Packard engines producing 1,200 hp each, allowing for a top speed of 29 knots (54 km/h). The ship was also fitted with two Osko-Ford petrol cruising engines producing 85 hp, allowing for a range of 1,500 nautical miles at a speed of 8 knots. 

In total, 80 OD-200 class ships were produced, including 16 OD-200bis class vessels. These ships entered service starting in 1943, supplementing the MO-4 submarine chasers in a variety of duties. In total, over 300 MO-4 and OD-200 class ships were built, serving an important role during the Great Patriotic War as artillery & landing support, anti-aircraft and anti-submarine vessels. The OD-200 class was exported in small numbers to Bulgaria and North Korea, with 10 and 3 units respectively. All ships were retired from Soviet service between 1949-1959.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=ussr_od_200 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{USSR boats}}