{{Specs-Card
|code=jp_pg02
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg|ArtImage_{{PAGENAME}}.png}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}} (N°822)''' is a variant on the Italian [[Sparviero]] hydrofoil missile boat for the JMSDF. The PG 02 is the 2nd in class out of 3 vessels. The JMSDF came to an agreement with Italy to license build up to 12 Nibbio Class, but opted for alternative Japanese armament instead; They switched out the OTO Melara gun for a [[JM61 (20 mm)]] Vulcan cannon and switching out the OTOMATs for Type 90 Ship-To-Ship Missiles. While construction of the 3rd boat was delayed in favour for Gulf War contributions, with further hydrofoil construction rejected and abandoned.

The {{PAGENAME}} was introduced as a [[wt:en/news/6163-development-the-japanese-fleet-in-war-thunder-pre-orders-for-the-pg-02-and-kiyoshimo-en|premium pack]] in [[Update 1.89 "Imperial Navy"]]. It was removed from sale after the [[wt:en/news/7013-shop-new-year-sale-en|2020 New Year sale]] and was reintroduced in 2021 as a premium vehicle purchasable in-game with Golden Eagles {{ge}} in [[Update "Ixwa Strike"]]. It is a fast, powerful and very agile fighting ship that could be compared to a piranha; it's very fast and agile, with speeds up to 129 km/h in Arcade and 96 km/h in Realistic battles. Equipped with a very deadly 6-barreled 20 mm JM61 rotary cannon with 3,000 rounds of ammunition mounted on the deck, and a Mark 36 SRBOC decoy system with 12 smoke rounds.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

* No armour installed, but the ship is entirely constructed from steel with thicknesses up to 8 mm.
* A low crew count of 11 sailors.

This ship has a high profile, it does not have the sleek and stealthy appearance of the [[Jaguar-Klasse (140)]] or the [[Pr.1124 (1940)]]. It is also possible to get stuck in low ceiling caves. It offers higher top speed, far more spacious internal design, faster acceleration and a steel construction, unlike the Jaguar-Klasse (140) which is made from a wooden construction and is slightly slower.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
A PG 02 uses a sleek hydrofoil design, which allows the ship to gain this vast speed. Another advantage of the hydrofoil design on this ship is that enemy torpedoes can pass under it when in the broadside position, since the hull of the ship floats above the water, like a cloud in the sky.

The manoeuvrability of this ship is good. It's extremely fast in a straight line, provides good handling and responds well to sudden movements. With maps which have mud & sandbanks, coral reefs or underwater objects the hydrofoil will get the ship stuck on them. It's incredibly important to be vigilant in the surroundings.

For example: if the cap zone is near an island make sure to slow down and stay away from the shoreline or risk running aground and becoming an easy target for enemy vessels.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|JM61 (20 mm)}}

The PG 02 carries a JM61 cannon, with a fire rate of 3,000 RPM or 450 RPM with the 'Autocannon' modification. With APDS rounds available to this rotary, the 3,000 RPM option chews up just about every boat, and can even be used to decent effect against destroyers. Aiming for large ships' guns will allow you to freely gun them down. and the APDS will cut through most small ships, killing them within seconds. It's a fairly accurate gun, however it can bounce a lot in heavy waves and it's hard to lead with past 2.5 km, though your max range is around 3 km anyway so that shouldn't really be an issue.

'''Belt composition:'''

* '''HEI:''' {{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''API-T:''' {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}
* '''APDS:''' {{Annotation|APDS|Armour-piercing discarding sabot}}{{-}}{{Annotation|APDS|Armour-piercing discarding sabot}}{{-}}{{Annotation|APDS|Armour-piercing discarding sabot}}{{-}}{{Annotation|APDS|Armour-piercing discarding sabot}}

{{:JM61 (20 mm)/Ammunition|API-T, HEF-I, APDS}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->

The 130 mm Mark 36 SRBOC decoy system is a short-range mortar which launches chaff into the air around the vessel. In-game it allows the captain to launch two smoke grenades in the air, which detonate above and on either side of the boat. However, there are currently no guided missiles to be confused by chaff and thus they operate as smoke grenades.

The system is armed with 6 volleys of 2 grenades, one off each side of the vessel aiming forward and can be seen in front of the bridge. The system is present on the vessel even if the modification is not selected. By default, it is not bound to any key and thus is not available in-game unless a binding is set in the controls menu.

The smoke clouds in-game are less effective than the default smoke screen as their coverage area is more limited and gaps can remain in the smokescreen allowing an enemy to continue tracking the screening vessel.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The PG 02 only has one gun. If the gun is knocked out in battle, or has to reload, the ship does not have anything else to use to defend itself in combat. However the JM61 20 mm rotary cannon is able to destroy enemy ships rapidly with ease, the APDS rounds making short work of enemy ships.

Using the JM61 it has two firing options, with or without the ''Autocannon'' modification. The modification prevents the gun from overheating by limiting the gun to fire at a slower rate of 450 rounds per minute. Without the modification, the gun can overheat very quickly. To reduce this, fire using a one to two-second burst and allow at least one second to cool down after firing the burst. This reduces the overheating, by allowing it to cool down to a controllable level which in the long term allows for more ships to be destroyed at a faster pace. It is not recommended to take the ''Autocannon'' modification, as it limits the effectiveness of the gun while its only benefit can be compensated with good trigger discipline.

It's very important to note that the ammunition can be consumed very rapidly, as the cannon was designed to fire 3,000 rounds per minute! It requires up to 23 seconds to reload and the fastest reload with an ace crew qualification is 20 seconds. It's very important to make every burst count, for example targeting other torpedo ships, the fastest way to sink them is to aim for the torpedoes which will detonate and cause the enemy ship to explode and sink!

One of the additional valuable advantages the PG 02 has is its radar. The radar is able to target enemy aerial units and predict their lead.

Dealing with larger targets such as Armoured Gun Boats or Frigates, these are heavily armoured and pack powerful cannons, which can easily destroy the PG 02 in a single shot with a well placed HE round.

The best way to knock these floating sea tanks out is to use APDS rounds and target the following critical elements:

* Ammo storage
* Engine room
* Superstructure elements like the bridge or funnels

It is also possible to encounter destroyers. The PG 02 can be easy destroyed by a destroyer at any range. It's important to note that the PG 02 will be unlikely to sink a destroyer, though it may be able to cause a substantial amount of damage to it. However to do this, close range is needed, aim for the turrets and knock them out first, then the torpedo tubes - if the destroyer sees this ship approaching, it will lock on and destroy it.

* Any ship with a large calibre cannon is a major threat, it's best to avoid these ships unless their main armament can be taken out quickly or at range.

Aircraft pose a major threat to this ship. Since it lacks any armour even the smallest calibre rounds are able to cause critical damage. When an enemy aircraft is detected, use the decoy system to cover the surroundings in smoke and hide until it has moved onto a new target. However, the PG 02 is able to take down enemy aircraft, rapidly fire a short quick burst and aim for critical elements: engine, flight deck and wing spars. The enemy aircraft will soon be diving into the clear water.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Boasts a 20 mm rotary cannon that can fire at 3,000 RPM, allowing swift and easy destruction of targets
* Boasts excellent top speed and manoeuvrability
* Can easily disable armaments on larger ships, such as destroyers and gunboats, in rapid succession
* Survivability rating is high - there are large empty spaces in the hull which can absorb multitude amount of small-medium projectiles

'''Cons:'''

* 20 mm rotary cannon can easily overheat and jam if fired for too long
* Hydrofoils diminish agility when traversing over shallow areas, such as islands and rock embankments. It will stagnate your speed, causing you to get permanently stuck in them
* HE shells will set the boat on fire
* The 20 mm cannon has only a single magazine, so it cannot bring more than one type of belt into battle
* Only has one gun, meaning you will be helpless if the gun is knocked out
* Can be hullbroken by larger calibre guns it often meets
* Very low crew count of 11, an accurate player can knock it out easily

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
A variant of the Italian Sparviero class missile boats, the Japanese 1-go class boats were chosen to replace the aging [[PT-15|PT 11]] class of torpedo boats, with the Japanese navy acquiring the license for domestic production in 1991, with 3 being made. Unlike the Italian boats, the 1-go class were fitted with a 20 mm M61 Vulcan rotary cannon and different anti-ship missiles.

The PG 02 No. 822 was laid down on 25th March 1991, launched on 17th July 1992 and commissioned into the Japanese Maritime Self Defence force in March of the following year. It would stay in active service until 6th June 2010.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=jp_pg02 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Images
<gallery mode="packed" caption="Store Pack Images" heights="150">
File:PG 02 Store Pack Image 01.jpg|
File:PG 02 Store Pack Image 02.jpg|
File:PG 02 Store Pack Image 03.jpg|
File:PG 02 Store Pack Image 04.jpg|
File:PG 02 Store Pack Image 05.jpg|
</gallery>

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|36GE5Yqyy5M|'''PG 02 - Fast Attack Hydrofoil - Sparviero-Class - Naval Gameplay''' - ''Cmdr. Tyrael''|3Zgt3Ep2ADM|'''The Shooting Range #150''' - ''Metal Beasts'' section at 01:50 discusses the PG 02.|i9dnF0Cnh7Q|'''Premium Vehicles: PG 02''' - ''War Thunder Wiki''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Similar Ships:

* [[Sparviero]] - Italian ship of the same class armed with a 76 mm cannon
* [[USS Tucumcari]] - Similar US ship using the same propulsion system

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/6163-development-the-japanese-fleet-in-war-thunder-pre-orders-for-the-pg-02-and-kiyoshimo-en|[Development] The Japanese Fleet in War Thunder: Pre-orders for the PG 02 and Kiyoshimo]]

{{ShipManufacturer Sumitomo Heavy Industries}}
{{Japan boats}}
{{Japan premium ships}}