{{Specs-Card
|code=jp_type_11_pt_15
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''PT-15 (Pennant No. 815), PT-11-class''' was the fifth of its class which was built in the 1970s as part of the 3rd Defense Plan. The class improved on the previous PT-10 class with advanced technologies. She had a length of 35m, a width of 9.2m, a displacement of 100 tons, and was equipped with four 53cm torpedoes and two Bofors 40mm guns. Her aluminum V-shaped hull and her CODAG engines gave her excellent speed and maneuverability. She could reach 40 knots and operated in the Maizuru and Ominato districts until she was retired in 1995.

It was introduced in [[Update 1.89 "Imperial Navy"]]. As a torpedo motor boat, the PT-815 is one of the most advanced Japanese patrol vessels, second only to the [[PG 02|PG-822]]. It has a high speed, a powerful armament, and excellent torpedoes. The Type 72 torpedo is its main weapon, capable of reaching 120 km/h and delivering 300 kg TnTe to targets up to 10 km away. This makes the PT-815 very effective against larger ships at medium and long distances. The vessel also has two 40 mm Bofors guns, which offer decent firepower but have a lower rate of fire than the [[L70 Bofors-Breda (40 mm)|Bofors-Breda variant]] used by the Freccia-class and Jaguar-class PTs.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.''

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.''

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)}}

Each Bofors gun is placed on front and back of boat. This mean that both of them have large natural blind spot. These are most effective when being used against small craft such as torpedo boats, motor gunboats, minesweepers and submarine chasers. In its BR class, it is possible to face larger threats including destroyers which will mostly be unharmed by this gunfire. Aircraft are also excellent targets and can be brought down with accurate fire. You can load Universal belt, HE belt or AP belt. Usage of these belts is similar to lower rank boats; Universal is good for start but later you should stick to HE or AP by what kind of target you encounter. The downside of the primary armament is that they can easily overheat if you fire for too long.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''40 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}

{{:Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)/Ammunition|HEFI-T, AP-T}}
=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|Type 72 mod.1 (533 mm)}}

This ship is armed with four Type 72 torpedoes on its sides. They are offset at a slight angle so you can't release all four of them at once on one target. The Type 72 torpedo has a very high speed of 120 km/h, on-top of having 10 km range, making it an excellent short to mid-range torpedo. It does come with a torpedo mode modification which allows it to go another 10 km making it usable on long-range targets. The Type 72's speed comes at the cost of explosive filler, being loaded with 300 kg of TNT.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
Usage of this boat is similar to [[Type T-38]]. You have very capable armament against other boats but that's about it. Type 11 is fairly big compared to other boats and mobility isn't its strong suit either. A good way to engage opponents is to stay back and use your fairly powerful armament against them, though the weapon placement means that if you want to use your maximum firepower you have to show your full profile to enemy. Try to look for islands and corridors where you will be hidden from high calibre long range cannons and ships with heavy armament that are common at this rank. You should not even try to engage bigger ships with cannons in open waters as they will notice you due to your size and can give you critical or fatal damage with a single shot. Using torpedoes is very situational; the only way to use them is to sneak around islands and attempt to surprise unwary destroyers.

In anti-aircraft role you have to rely on yourself as this boat doesn't have any secondary or AA armament. Although Bofors guns can be very effective against airplanes you should focus on ships which are a bigger threat for you.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''
* Primary armament can be effective with skilful use
* 4 torpedoes with incredibly fast top speed

'''Cons:'''
* No secondary or AA weapons
* Very vulnerable, easy to be knocked out by high calibre guns
* Relatively big size compared to other torpedo boats
* When using both Bofors guns, the boat will expose its large profile to the enemy

== History ==
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=jp_type_11_pt_15 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/4203-development-type-11-pt-15-shore-guard-en/|[Development] Type 11 PT-15: Shore Guard]]

{{Manufacturer MHI}}
{{Japan boats}}