{{Specs-Card
|code=us_elco_80ft_pt_boat_mod01
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}<!-- Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour. -->
The PT-314, as a MTB, isn't the most survivable. It has a crew count of 12, many of which are located at the gun turrets, meaning that the boat can't take too many hits before the crew is depleted. The boat's engines, fuel tank and ammunition stowages are all exposed above the waterline to some extent, meaning that they are susceptible to critical damage. The only armoured spots are the bridge (6.35 mm of hardened armour) and the 40 mm cannon (12.7 mm antifragmentation armour); the ship's other turrets are easily knocked out by enemy gunfire.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}<!-- Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed. -->
The PT-314's mobility is fairly competitive among MTBs. The boat has a top speed of 105 km/h in arcade and 75 km/h in realistic mode, making it fairly fast among MTBs. Additionally, the PT-314 has a decent turning circle, though sustained turns will bleed off the boat's speed. Finally, the PT-314's acceleration is pretty mediocre for an MTB.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)|AN-M4 (37 mm)}}

The PT-314 gets access to a single 40 mm Bofors guns at the stern of the vessel. This weapon is extremely potent against aircraft due to its accuracy and punching power. Though this weapon fires slower than the 20 mm Oerlikon or 12.7 mm AN/M2, it more than makes up for it due to its hard-hitting 40 mm shells. The 40 mm Bofors is capable of shredding aircraft and small boats from ranges of 2.5 km away, though effectiveness will drop off after that range due to the large bullet drop. The gun fires from 4-round clips that reload continuously, meaning that the weapon is capable of continuous fire. However, note that it will eventually overheat and jam after firing for too long.

Alongside the 40 mm cannon, the PT-314 gets access to a single 37 mm AN-M4 cannon located on the bow. This weapon is an interesting autocannon and fires much slower than the Bofors at the rear. It's also magazine-fed, meaning that it will have to reload after every thirty shots. Despite this, the weapon has great damage-dealing capacity and can be used in conjunction with the 40 mm Bofors cannon to deal with naval targets.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''40 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}

{{:Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)/Ammunition|HEFI-T, AP-T}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II (20 mm)}}

The PT-314 gets access to a single 20 mm Oerlikon cannon as its secondary armament. The 20 mm Oerlikon Cannon was the standard light anti-aircraft gun for several nations, including the United States, and replaced the prior AN/M2 Browning machine gun. This weapon is an effective short-range AA gun, but can be used against ships as well. The weapon has access to three belts: Default, AP and HE. Of these, the HE belt is by far the most effective against boats and aircraft due to its high explosive mass. As well, the guns fire from a drum magazine that will need to be reloaded. Because of the magazine design, the gun will not jam with continuous fire.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''20 mm HE:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''20 mm AP:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP-T, HEF-I}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|AN-M2 (12.7 mm)}}

The PT-314 gets access to two dual 12.7 mm AN/M2 machine gun mounts. The AN/M2 is a navalized anti-aircraft version of the popular Browning machine gun. This gun is rather ineffective at dealing significant damage to enemy aircraft, and is only effective within a ~1.5 to 2 km range at most. As well, keep in mind that these guns have a long 12-second reload after the gun's magazine has been depleted. Due to the magazine configuration, the gun will not jam with continuous firing.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
{{main|Mk.13 (569 mm)}}<!-- Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section. -->

The PT-314 gets access to four 569 mm Mk.13 torpedoes, also found on many other American MTBs. This torpedo is a short torpedo designed for aircraft, and as a result, it has some downsides. Notably, the torpedo has a small explosive filler of 178 kg of TNT, along with a slow running speed of 56 km/h. The torpedoes have a maximum range of 5.21 km, and no modification is available to increase this range. The primary downside of these torpedoes is that you will likely need multiple hits to destroy larger vessels; against cruisers, the torpedoes may not even do damage if running at 1 m depth. Additionally, the slow speed of these torpedoes makes them quite difficult-to-aim. Thus, the Mk.13 is best used in ambush situations from short range, where multiple hits are highly likely.

== Usage in battles ==
''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good firepower, can effectively engage both air and other sea targets
* Good mobility, with great top speed
* Armour is thin enough not to set off HE fuzes
* Relatively small target

'''Cons:'''

* Guns are awkwardly placed around the hull
* Thin armour means it's easily shredded even by rifle-calibre machine guns

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
PT-314 was laid down on 11 December 1942 and launched on 20 February 1943. PT-314 was in service from 11 March 1943 until sold on 23 June 1948. PT-314 served in MTB RON 5 in the South Pacific under Lt John W. Ewell. <ref>Steve Laroe, US PT Boats List: Squadron List, http://www.hazegray.org/</ref>

PT-314 was the lead boat in a class of 54 (314-367) built for the US Navy in 1943.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=us_elco_80ft_pt_boat_mod01 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

=== References ===
<references />

{{ShipManufacturer Elco}}
{{USA boats}}