{{Specs-Card
|code=us_higgins_78ft_pt658
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium gift rank {{Specs|rank}} American motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced during [[Update "Direct Hit"]] as a reward for [[Battle Pass: Season V, "River Hunter"]].

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
The survivability of the PT-658 is the same as most other small coastal vessels: if you get hit, it's going to hurt. The wooden construction and lack of dedicated armour on the boat makes for a short lifespan while under fire if not approached carefully. The best way to maximize your odds is hide behind islands, outcroppings, or other form of cover until an unaware victim has passed. Captains should also remember that large calibre shells may destroy the vessel outright with a single direct hit, making even the weakest destroyer a valid threat.

Ammunition on the PT-658 is stored in two locations; one cache below the forward 37 mm cannon and the other below the 40 mm cannon. This often means that when an opponent is aiming to knock out your two main armaments they may detonate your ammo.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
PT boats in general have excellent mobility, and the PT-658 is no exception to this rule. It combines superb acceleration, excellent manoeuvrability in tight spaces, and an above average top speed to make for an excellent early game capture point taker.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)|AN-M4 (37 mm)}}

The primary armament of the PT-658 consists of two main cannons of differing calibres. The first is a forward-mounted [[AN-M4 (37 mm)|37 mm AN-M4]] and the second is a rear-mounted [[Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)|40 mm Bofors L/60 Mark 3]]. These two weapons can knock out most coastal vessels with a few sustained volleys and can easily cripple aircraft with a single hit or two hits. Keeping this is mind allows for aggressive attacks with overwhelming firepower.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}

{{:Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)/Ammunition|HEFI-T, AP-T}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II (20 mm)}}

The PT-658 is armed with two 20mm Oerlikon Mk.II cannons as secondary armament. These are effective as both anti-surface and anti-air weapons with the HE shells being particularly effective against aircraft. The fire rate adds to this effectiveness as a near miss can quickly be corrected to ensure accuracy. It should be noted however that both cannons are in exposed mounts which means they can easily be knocked out by hits or near misses with HE shells. 

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''20 mm HE:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''20 mm AP:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mk.II (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP-T, HEF-I}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|AN-M2 (12.7 mm)}}

The PT-658 is equipped with four .50 caliber machine guns in two dual mounts located just behind and above the bridge. These machine guns provide adequate short range anti-air coverage but at the cost of both range and damage per shot. They may also act as a limited anti surface weapon, but their damage potential is limited to small PT boats and contemporaries.  

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|Mk.6 depth charge|Mk.7|Mk.13 (569 mm)}}

The PT-658 is equipped with three special armaments. These include the [[Mk.6 depth charge|Mk.6]] depth charge (carries two), the [[Mk.7 (127 mm)|Mk.7]] 127mm rocket (carries sixteen), and the [[Mk.13 (569 mm)|Mk.13]] (569mm) torpedo (carries two). 

Starting with the Mk.6 depth charge, it is a standard depth charge equipped with 136kg of TNT and is dropped off of the rear of the boat. It is recommended to leave this armament off of the boat as it lacks usefulness in most situations and adds 272kg of explosives exposed to shrapnel and incoming shells. 

The second form of special armament is the Mk.7 127mm (5 inch) rocket. The boat carries sixteen of these small rockets at the bow of the ship in mounts that can adjust vertically but not horizontally. Each rocket contains .79kg of TNT which makes its usefulness limited to attacked small boats and sub chasers. It is recommended to bring these into matches as they are effective with direct hits usually one shotting compartments of boats and occasionally detonating ammo with a good hit. 

The third and final form of special armament is the Mk.13 torpedo. This is a general purpose torpedo using 178kg of TNT as its warhead payload. It is a relatively slow torpedo at 56km/h with a range of 5.21km. It is an overall effective counter to most destroyers and large sub chasers you may face. These make for great ambush weapons on maps where you can hide behind islands or other such obstacles and sneak up on large unaware prey. 

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The PT-658 can be played as an aggressive scout vehicle in that while it lacks the survivability and durability of larger boats, it makes up for it with sheer firepower and mobility. This makes for an extremely effective early match vehicle where capping points, and eliminating the hostiles capturing those points is key. After the points are capped or if the mode doesn't have them, focus on eliminating enemy small craft such as PT boats or other small vessels. The use of the rockets make this task easier as you can launch almost 13kg of explosives bow on against enemies while simultaneously limiting your silhouette. Do not openly attack large sub-chasers or destroyers unless surprise (or desperation) is on your side. The short range of the torpedoes makes long range attacks impractical/impossible and thus should be used for ambushes against the previously mentioned destroyers or sub-chasers. 

Overall the PT-658 is best used aggressively against other small vessels with capping points as a close second objective if applicable. It is most effective on maps with cover and concealment to limit exposure to larger and more dangerous opponents. 

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Punches well above its weight in the firepower category
* Excellent overall manoeuvrability in all situations
* Small silhouette allows for effective sneak attacks
* Premium bonuses allow for quick coastal research

'''Cons:'''

* Complete glass cannon, will easily get destroyed by sustained enemy fire
* Rockets have little practical use
* Depth charges are of limited use

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->
''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.''

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/7381-development-battle-pass-vehicles-pt-658-torpedo-boat-en|[Devblog] Battle Pass vehicles: PT-658 torpedo boat]]

{{ShipManufacturer Higgins}}
{{USA boats}}
{{USA premium ships}}