{{Specs-Card
|code=us_pt810
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} American motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
The 89-ft PT-810 doesn't have much in the way of survivability due to its small size and lack of armour. The ship has a crew complement of 17 crew members, which is fairly large for a small MTB but still very lacking in terms of survivability. A couple of hits from high-calibre autocannons (such as the ship's own 40 mm Bofors cannon) will be enough to incapacitate most of the ship's crew, while a single hit from a cannon of 127 mm calibre or above will usually be enough to destroy the ship completely. The sole advantage of the PT-810 in this regard is its large size; while this makes the ship easier to hit, it means that single hits are less likely to incapacitate all crew within a compartment.

The PT-810, unsurprisingly, has no armour on the hull; made out of 51 mm of wood, this hull provides extremely limited protection and is rather susceptible to fires (go figure, it's wood). The ship does have 9.52 mm of hardened armour protecting its two Oerlikon mounts, but this armour won't really do much either due to its low thickness. The ship's four engines are all mounted in the centre of the ship parallel to each other - thus, a single well-placed hit can knock out all four engines. However, on the plus side, this means that smaller hits are less likely to knock out all of the ship's engines, allowing the PT-810 to continue moving, albeit at a slower speed. The ship's Oerlikon ammunition storages are placed between the engines and fuel tanks in a low position, making them relatively hard to hit. However, the PT-810's 40 mm ammunition storages are at the front and high above the waterline, meaning that any high-calibre hit to the front section is likely to detonate them. Be especially aware of this when attacking bow-in, as a stray destroyer shell can easily detonate the ammunition and destroy the ship.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
The PT-810 is interesting in terms of mobility. Firstly, the ship has an excellent top speed of 115 km/h in AB spaded and 82 km/h in RB. However, the ship isn't great in terms of acceleration and turn radius - its massive size prevents it from turning on a dime like earlier American PT boats. When utilizing the ship against larger targets such as destroyers, utilize cover whenever possible. Plan every manoeuvre because the PT-810 doesn't have the ability to execute rapid turns like earlier PT boats.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)}}

PT-810 has two 40 mm L/60 Bofors cannons which are a step above previous American torpedo boats. The cannons are arranged with one on the bow and the other on the stern so careful manoeuvring will be required to maintain both on a target. These are most effective when being used against small craft such as torpedo boats, motor gunboats, minesweepers and submarine chasers. In its BR class, it is possible to face larger threats including destroyers which will mostly be unharmed by this gunfire. Aircraft are also excellent targets and can be brought down with accurate fire.

The 40 mm L/60 Bofors Mark 3 cannon has access to three available belts:
* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm AP clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}
* '''40 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}

{{:Bofors L/60 Mark 3 (40 mm)/Ammunition|HEFI-T, AP-T}}

Some of the more heavily armoured gunboats, such as the Russian ones, will be immune to the 40 mm HE shells so it may be wise to be a belt of AP. Against aircraft, HE is the most optimal choice. Otherwise, the Universal belt provides a good balance against most targets.

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mark 24 (20 mm)}}

For secondary armament, PT-810 has a pair of twin 20 mm Oerlikon Mark 24 cannons. These are grouped amidships with one of the mounts being next to the bridge in an elevated position which gives it clear angles of fire, with the other being on the deck just behind the bridge. They can serve as closer range anti-aircraft defenses as well as targeting small boats that are in close proximity. The range on these cannons is limited, so be aware that their use will be restricted to close quarters combat.

The 20 mm Oerlikon Mark 24 cannon has access to three available belts:

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''20 mm HE:''' {{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''20 mm AP:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:20 mm/70 Oerlikon Mark 24 (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP-T, HEF-I}}

The Universal or HE belts are generally the most effective choices for the 20 mm Oerlikons, as anything that has substantial armour will be able to defeat even the 20 mm AP shells. The HE belts will also give the best effectiveness against aircraft.

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|Mk 2 mortar}}

PT-810 has a dedicated 81 mm Mark 2 mortar on the starboard (right) side just aside the bridge. This can either be aimed manually by selecting it or it will fire automatically. The mortar fires the M43A1 HE shell only, and as it is a mortar the shell has an extremely ballistic arc with a very low muzzle velocity (254 m/s) which makes targeting difficult. This weapon is rather hard to use, due to its low muzzle velocity and high trajectory. However, this allows the weapon to be used in certain situations; for example, if an enemy is hiding behind an island or other ground cover, switch to the Mk 2 mortar and lob a couple shells at them - combined with the mortar's high ballistic trajectory, this allows you to engage enemies who think that they're safe hiding behind ground cover.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|Mk.16 (533 mm)|Mk.6 depth charge}}

While the torpedoes on the PT-810 may be smaller than previous torpedo boats, they are very dangerous and can be highly effective if used correctly. The 21" (53.3 cm) Mark 16 is a high-performance torpedo with short-range but excellent speed. While the distance travelled is only 6,400 m they have a speed of 46 knots (85 km/h) which is only slightly slower than some other small craft. In addition, the warhead is formed out of 572 kg of Torpex which gives it a TNT equivalence of 915.2 kg. This is nearly as destructive as the most powerful Japanese torpedo, the [[Type 93 Model 3 (610 mm)|Type 93 Model 3]]. Due to the restricted range, and no modification to increase it at the expense of speed, this makes the Mark 16 an ambush torpedo. If the torpedoes are used carefully and aimed properly, it is possible to take out multiple large vessels with a single salvo.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The PT-810 can be thought of as a exceptionally well-armed heavy PT boat that can capture bases and engage larger targets when necessary. It has good mobility and excellent weapons making it a very effective vessel when used correctly.

'''Usage against other coastal vessels:'''

The PT-810 is very effective against other coastal vessels due to its heavy armament and high speed. However, it is key to be aware of your surroundings, as the PT-810 is not very survivable and will be shredded by the high-power weapons of vessels such as the [[Albatros]], [[Pr. 206]], [[PG 02]] and [[Sparviero]]. When using this vessel, use its high top speed to capture bases quickly. Then, engage other enemy vessels. When attacking enemy boats, utilize ground cover whenever possible. This will help keep the PT-810 alive, as its small crew count will allow it to be shredded by just about any boat it faces at its BR. Against smaller vessels, use the PT-810's high-power 40 mm cannons to shred them apart. Against larger vessels such as the German ferry barges, the 40 mm guns can be used but are less effective; however, when utilizing ground cover, the 81 mm mortar can be much more effective in this situation due to its high shell arc. Of course, the ship's four Mk. 16 torpedoes can also be used - packing almost a ton of TNT equivalent, they can knock out almost everything they hit.

'''Usage against larger vessels:'''

Against larger vessels such as destroyers and cruisers, the PT-810 has one key advantage - its four 21-inch (533 mm) Mk.16 heavyweight torpedoes. Though these torpedoes have a short range of 6.4 km, they pack an incredibly high explosive filler of 572 kg of Torpex, equivalent to 915 kg of TNT. This makes them by far the most effective American torpedo available; in comparison, the standard American Mk. 15 torpedo packs just 224 kg of TNT. This weapon can hullbreak destroyers and explode the ammunition racks of cruisers easily, making it the go-to option for dealing with enemy bluewater ships.

At the start of the battle, focus on capturing bases; after all, they are and will always be your first priority. Then, once bases are captured, begin hit-and-run attacks against enemy ships. Good usage of ground cover is essential in this playstyle, because it will keep the PT-810 alive. In conquest maps, you don't have this option, meaning that the PT-810 will have to resort to longer-ranged attacks. The ideal torpedo launch range for the PT-810 is roughly 2.5 to 3 km - at this range, the enemy ship will not be too effective with their secondary armament, but your torpedoes will be highly accurate. However, if ground cover is available, you can sneak far in, maybe even within one kilometre - at that range, your torpedoes are a guaranteed kill if aimed correctly. A single torpedo is enough for destroyers, provided that you aim effectively; against cruisers, more torpedoes may be necessary.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Good mobility - 115 km/h spaded in AB and 82 km/h spaded in RB
* Extremely heavy armament of two 40 mm Bofors L/60 guns and four 20 mm Oerlikons, along with a mortar
* Gets access to four Mk.16 torpedoes which are highly effective against all targets
** Mk.16 torpedoes have almost a ton of TNT equivalent, making them the second-most-effective torpedo in the game after the Japanese [[Type 93 Model 3 (610 mm)|Type 93 Mod. 3]]
** Torpedoes fire almost directly forward making them easier to fire
* Four engines - difficult to incapacitate all engines at the same time

'''Cons:'''

* Low survivability with just 17 crew members and no hull armour; Oerlikons are protected by 9.52 mm of hardened armour
* Extremely large for a PT boat (89 ft long) making it easier to hit than other boats at its BR
* Forward ammunition storage is located high above the water and is easy to detonate by any hits from the front
* 81 mm mortar is relatively situational and is only useful in a couple of situations

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

PT-810 was one of four experimental PT boats built in 1945, named PT-809 through PT-812. All four of the ships were built with an aluminum hull, but they used different methods of construction; the PT-810 used a combination of rivets and welding. PT-810 was powered by four Packard W-100 gasoline engines - rated at 2,500 hp each - driving four shafts. A maximum speed in excess of 40 knots could be attained. The displacement was 90 tons, the length was 89 feet, the beam was 21 feet 1 inch, and the draft was 5 feet 9 inches.

PT-810 had an armament of two single-mounted 40 mm guns, two twin 20 mm mounts (total of four guns), and one 81 mm mortar. Additionally, there were plans for the provision of four 21 inch torpedoes, but they seem to not have ever been equipped. The two twin 20 mm mounts were placed so that they could both fire on each broadside, a decision that was influenced by the success of similar arrangements on World War 2 Elco 80-foot motor torpedo boats. The PT-810 was fitted with an SPS-5 surface-search radar upon completion.

PT-810 was laid down by Bath Iron Works in Bath, ME, on 1 December 1948. It was launched on 2 June 1950 and completed on 24 November 1951, entering service soon after. Her first commanding officer (CO) was LTJG Robert Beveridge. PT-810 was later commanded by LT Franklin Joyce. PT-810 was used for testing and training purposes, often being seen with PT-811 and the other prototypes, and never saw action or combat of any sort. It was struck from the Naval Register on 1 November 1959. On 21 December 1961, the ship was reinstated on the Naval Register and reclassified as Fast Patrol Craft PTF-1. It was sunk as a target ship off of Vietnam on 1 August 1965.

=== [[wt:en/news/4205-development-pt-810-the-american-leviathan-en/|Devblog]] ===
The PT-810 was one of four experimental boats built in [1951] with various armaments, but with an identical powertrain. She is a rather large patrol torpedo boat with a draft displacement of 90 tons. The craft was designed to be equipped with armaments of several types at once. The first, of course, was torpedoes: four torpedo tubes with Mk 16 torpedoes were located along the vessel's sides. In the stern, the engineers placed two depth charge launchers. They also didn't skimp on artillery armament: the experience of real-life battles had resulted in some significant corrections to the requirements for patrol boats. Two single Bofors 40 mm guns were placed in rotating turrets in the bow and stern of the boat. Two twin Oerlikon 2 0mm guns were mounted on the bridge and above the engine compartment. As if this wasn't enough, the boat was also equipped with an 81 mm Mk 2 Mod 0 mortar with the ability to fire shells not only in a high arc, but also with direct aim.

The vessel was propelled by four engines, each putting out 1,200 hp. Thanks to the boat's small mass, these engines gave her an excellent speed of 44 knots (over 80 km/h).

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=us_pt810 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos
{{Youtube-gallery|ryfyneZ7390|'''The Shooting Range #106''' - ''Metal Beasts'' section at 00:30 discusses the PT-810.}}

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{ShipManufacturer Bath Iron Works}}
{{USA boats}}