{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_rboot_r130
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German motor gun boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

The R-130 is constructed using wood, the superstructure is hardened wood constructed to a thickness of 12 mm. The wooden construction of the R-130 means fire is one of the biggest threats to the survival of the ship, the hull will not absorb so much damage. There is no armour on the ship. The R-130 has a crew placement of 41, which provides a great attachment of sailors, which helps to increases the overall survivability of the R-130 dramatically compared to other ships in this tier.

Compared to the previous version [[R-41]] which only offered two single [[2_cm/65_C/30_(20_mm)|20 mm 2 cm/65 C/30 automatic cannons]]. The R-130 has increased its armament with the addition of a single [[3.7_cm_FlaK-Lafette_C/36_(37_mm)|37 mm 3.7 cm FlaK-Lafette C/36 automatic cannon]]. This substantially increases the firepower, by allowing for heavy and harder-hitting rounds. It also provides an additional benefit that it helps to increase the survivability of this vessel.

However, the internal components of the R-130 are spaced out, meaning a good volley of enemy fire will not completely incapacitate the ship.

* The engine is placed, under the conning tower of the ship, with the transmission extending towards the stern (rear) to the Voith Schneider propulsion system.
* The transmission is under the waterline which protects it from most enemy rounds, which would penetrate the ship.
* Enemy fire can destroy the Voith Schneider propulsion system as it extends above the waterline.
* Enemy fire can penetrate the ship's fuel and ammunition storage due to the fact that these locations are above the waterline.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->

The R-130 is slow in comparison to other naval ships at this tier, however, it is equipped with a Voith Schneider propulsion system which makes up for the slow top speed. The Voith-Schneider Propulsion system empowers the R-130 (and [[R-boot R-41]]) with a top speed of 50 km/h in arcade battles. In realistic and simulator modes, it has a top speed of 37 km/h, which is still respectfully fast, for a naval ship. Unlike other ships which use a conventional propeller & rudder system, the Voith-Schneider Propulsion (VSP) system uses a "cyclorotor" which provides incredible manoeuvrability, allowing incoming enemy fire and torpedoes to be dodged, just before they are about to impact the ship, without delay, whilst keeping the top speed almost the same. This effect is only partially modelled.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 C/30 (20 mm)}}

The 2 cm/65 C/30 automatic cannons are equipped with a 40 round magazine.
To best utilise the cannon in a naval battle environment,  ideally use universal or the APT magazine choice. These provide the most stopping power in a ship to ship encounter. When operating the cannons, aim in front of the enemy ship, and adjust the fire by watching the tracer rounds hit the target. Locate the key areas which are important for the rivalship to survive and target those i.e. Bridge, Engine room, Ammunition storage areas.

The 2 cm/65 C/30 automatic cannons work very well in close and medium-range engagement. However, at a long-distance engagement, they are not as effective as other types of guns or cannons.

When engaging enemy aircraft, the 2 cm/65 C/30 automatic cannons are able to deliver a catastrophic blow to any enemy aircraft, which may decide your attack. The hitting power from these rounds, make this one of the most powerful anti-air deterrence in the game. With a few well-placed shots, Aim for the wing spars and engines the enemy aircraft will soon be destroyed.

There are three ammunition types available:

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''20 mm HET magazines:''' {{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}
* '''20 mm APT magazines:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}

{{:2 cm/65 C/30 (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP, AP-T, HEF}}

These require a 4 to 5.2 second reload time to replace a used magazine with a new one. To get the stupendous 4 seconds reload time, the crew requires an ace qualification, with crew skills to be fully achieved in the main calibre reload speed field.

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)}}

The 3.7 cm FlaK-Lafette C/36 automatic cannon, is classed an auxiliary gun. The 37 mm is placed on the stern (rear) of the ship, it has a great arc of fire. This can cover almost all the ship except for the bow (front), however, with the great agility of this ship with some careful manoeuvring it is able to overcome this hurdle.

To get the best performance out this while engaging enemy aircraft and ships using the 3.7 cm FlaK-Lafette C/36 is able to make short work of any irritating aircraft, without delay. It is suited to close and medium-range targets. However due to the impressive reload rate of this cannon, which only holds five rounds of ammunition per magazine, it is able to switch in between HET and APT in virtually no time.
With the 3.7 cm, FlaK-Lafette C/36 has a reload speed from 0.25 to 0.13 seconds, in order to get the fastest time being classed as an auxiliary gun
To achieve the stupendous 0.13 second reload time, the crew requires an ace qualification, with crew skills to be fully achieved in the auxiliary gun reload speed field.


* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''37 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm APT clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-I, AP-T}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|WBF depth charge|EMC mine}}

The WBF depth charge, holds 60 kg of an explosive charge, it is a great weapon in the hands of a skilled captain, the depth charge can be placed to cause destruction to enemy ships by exploding below.  The only reason the depth charge should be used on these types of ships is if enemy ships get to close. Depth charges are more inline to be a defensive weapon, instead of an offensive weapon. This ship uses the Voith Schneider propulsion system which provides incredible manoeuvrability, it is very easy to manoeuvre the bow where these are placed and drop them all under the enemy ship, causing the rival to explode.

It is important to remember that if they are destroyed on deck, it could also destroy the ship.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The R-boot R-130, is long, lacks armour, but is highly manoeuvrable with it's Voith Schneider propulsion system. This empowers sharp and fast turns which allow the ship to make sudden broadsides with its great armament which is able to accurately knock out an enemy target with a good range. The propulsion system, allows enemy shells to be dodged and courses changed, putting enemy range finders to shame.

This boat could be compared to a lobster, you will not be the first to cap a zone, but you will get there. You will be able to defend off attackers, whether it be air or naval units.

It is important to turn the ship into them, keeping the profile small until you are within range to turn the ship broadside to bear the powerful cannons on to the opposing ship. If it is possible to get as close as you can, then drop some depth charges under them to knock them out with a splash.
The 20 mm autocannons, when using the cannons, make sure to track each round and adjust them - as soon as the rounds start hitting they will be dealing damage to the enemy ship or aircraft. When using the 37 mm autocannon, it's short clips and supersonic reloading times, allow it to dominate the sea battle.

To take advantage, it is recommended that you put the Primary armament under command of the game A.I. system and control the 37 mm yourself, this will allow you to command the battle. Or take command of all the guns yourself, beware - you will need to stay very alert and keep an eye out for air and small boats which may try to sneak up and knock you out.

The most dangerous foes which this ship could face is are small fast attack and cannon equipped ships such as the [[G-5]], which small profile and incredible manoeuvrability allow it to get close, it packs a powerful 12.7 mm machine gun or for the [[G-5 (ShVAK)]] which features a 20 mm cannon.

The [[BMO]], [[Pr.1124 early]] and others like this, offer a sleek stealthy silhouette which can be hard to detect and could be easily missed in the heat of battle. Which can also be hard to knock out since they are armoured very well with armour plating. These ships also offer firepower which can knock out some of the biggest and meanest ships, with some well-placed shots, [[HMCS Brantford]], [[PC-451]] are also to be watched out for.

These ships can be countered by knocking out the main armament, first with well-placed shots. Once this is done, aim for the centre of the ship, and bridge area was the majority of the crew is located and fire up down its length until it is knocked out.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Powerful main armament of two 20 mm cannons and one 37 mm cannon
** Gains an additional 37 mm gun compared to the previous [[R-41]]
* Excellent handling for a ship of its size
* Crew are relatively spaced-out due to the large size of the hull
* The bridge is protected by hardened armour, increasing survivability


'''Cons:'''

* Relatively slow for a ship of its class - just 32 km/h stock in RB/SB
* Only 40 rounds of ammo per magazine for the 20 mm cannons
** Requires up to 5.2 seconds to reload a magazine
* Hull is completely unprotected and vulnerable to machine-gun fire
** Engines and ammunition storages are above water and can be damaged easily
* Relatively large and bulky, meaning that other people can hit your ship without much effort

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

Developed in the inter-war period, the R-Boots (Raumbootes) were designed as minesweepers, and they had deliberately low draughts in order to operate close to the coast. The armament was limited due to the intended mission of the ships. Propulsion was provided by two MAN marine diesel engines, providing 1,836 horsepower each and driving two shafts. Construction utilized a metal understructure and wooden framing.

424 R-Boots were completed, and they continually saw service up until 1945. They were notably used during the 1940 invasion of Norway. Only 140 of these ships survived the war, with many captured by the Allies or divided up between the Allies as spoils of war. 24 R-Boots were eventually reintroduced to the West German Navy and operated until the 1960's.

The R-Boots, despite being built as minesweepers, were forced into other roles during the war. They were used for search-and-rescue (SAR), ship hunting, coastal patrol, and convoy escort, among other duties such as minelaying. The ships were rarely used in their intended role (minesweeping) because of the defensive nature of the war for the Kriegsmarine.

The R-130 was the lead ship of an R-Boot class, significantly larger than the preceding [[R-41]]. It had a length of 41 m and a displacement of 150 tons. This class consisted of R-130 through R-150, and the class was constructed until 1944.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_rboot_r130 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{ShipManufacturer Abeking and Rasmussen}}
{{Germany boats}}