{{About
| about = German motor torpedo boat '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = the other variants
| link = S-boot (Family)
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_s_100_class
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test.

The S-100 class was an improvement of a preceding S-38 class by installing a more powerful engine and adding gun shields to protect gunners from shrapnel. S-100 was sunk while anchored in Le Havre harbour, France on 15th June 1944.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

The S-100, like most low tier ships, has limited armour protection. The bridge is protected by 12 mm of hardened armour, and the two rear turrets are similarly defended. None of the other components of the ship, such as the engines and fuel tanks, are protected.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
Despite its size,the S-100 is a fast and manoeuvrable at most speeds, making it an easy ship to control and play. With three engines powering the ship, the acceleration is very good, and with a bit of practice, the S-100 is able to accelerate even during turns. The ship itself does not bleed speed very much when performing hard turns.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}
The usual route of researching modules should be taken: Tool Set and Fire Protection System as first two vital modules. The next module to be researched that can aid the captain of a S-100 is smokescreen, helping evade enemy fire and launch torpedoes while withdrawing back into the cover of the smoke.

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 Flakzwilling 38 (20 mm)}}
The S-100 is armed with three 20 mm cannons. The single 2 cm/65 C/38 automatic cannon is located on the bow with a very limited forward firing angle. Due to the size of ship, the vertical guidance of only -5° makes it unable to fire in front of the ship unless the target is at considerable distance. The second gun is a dual mount 2 cm/65 Flakzwilling 38 automatic cannon located amidship with a 8 mm thick hardened armour plate protecting the crew from machine gun rounds and shrapnels. The gun can be fired effectively only when utilizing it broadside and leaving the vessel vulnerable to enemy fire. Like the bow mounted gun, it has a limited vertical guidance of only -5°, because of the railing around the ship.

Three different ammunition belts are available:
* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''20 mm HET magazines:''' {{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}
* '''20 mm APT magazines:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}

{{:2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP, AP-T, HEF}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)}}

The S-100 is armed with a single 3.7 cm FlaK located at the stern, it is protected by a gun shield made from 12 mm thick hardened armour plate. With addition of the ability to use both secondary and primary guns with a single trigger, this gun became the main source of damage against enemies due to being more powerful over distance when compared to 20 mm autocannons. Unfortunately it suffer from poor guidance caused by the railing around the ship like the 20 mm dual mounted cannon. Same tactics should be used as with the 20 mm.

Three different ammunition belts are available:
* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''37 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm APT clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-I, AP-T}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|MG 15 (7.92 mm)}}

One machine gun is mounted on either side of the bridge. Because of this, they have very limited traverse and are mostly ineffective against aircraft. However, they do have a high rate of fire.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)|EMF mine}}

The torpedo tubes are fixed to the hull of the ship, so torpedoes must be aimed by changing the direction of the vessel. With a base speed of 81 km/h, a range of 6 km and a payload of 358.4 kg TNTeq, the 533 mm G7a torpedoes sport a large explosive mass. When upgraded with a torpedo mode, the speed decreases to 56 km/h while boosting the range to 14 km.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The S-100 shares the same hull and playstyle as the S-38b. The key differences are the 3.7 cm auxiliary weapon and the limited AA firing angle. Although it's tempting to, turning broadside to use the centre-mounted dual cannons is ill-advised in most cases, as the hull is fragile. Using speed to deliver surprise attacks and flanking lone enemies is the way to go, but never attack a group when outnumbered. Captains may find the S-100 an effective destroyer hunter with this ship's high speed and effective torpedoes.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->
'''Pros:'''

* Slightly faster than the S-38b when fully upgraded with same mobility
* Excellent fast-firing cannons with double the ammo capacity compared to its predecessor
* 3.7 cm cannon has high rate of fire and no overheat, making very deadly against small ships and aircraft
* Great torpedoes with convenient firing angle and excellent damage

'''Cons:'''

*  3.7 cm cannon has limited arc and cannot shoot directly ahead
*  7.92 mm MG 15 have limited firing angles and are ineffective as AA armament
* Minimal hull protection

== History ==
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_s_100_class Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Images
<gallery mode="packed-hover" heights="200">
File:Germany ship locked.jpg|<small>In-game graphic showcasing two S-100s on an attack run in a rough seas</small>
</gallery>

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[S-204 Lang]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wt:en/news/4204-development-s-100-1945-master-of-the-seas-en/|[Devblog] S-100 (1945): Master of the Seas]]

{{ShipManufacturer Lürssen}}
{{Germany boats}}