{{About
| about = German motor torpedo boat '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = the other version
| link = S-100
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_s_100_s_174_class
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] in the fleet closed beta test.
The S-100 class was an improvement of a preceding S-38 class by installing a more powerful engine and adding gun shields to protect gunners from shrapnel. The ship featured in the game is S-147, it was Sunk in the evening of March 25th south of Isle of Wight in combat by French destroyer escort La Combattante.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
The S-100 (1944), as with most vessels of the same type, does not have much in the way of armour. It has 12 mm of hardened armour protecting the bridge, 8 mm on the centre 20 mm Flakzwilling cannon mounting, and another 12 mm on the rear mount. Survivability is about average, with a slightly larger size helping with its crew distribution. The craft, as with any other like it, has a weak propulsion system, and thus can be immobilized by a nearby bomb or rocket explosion. All the other components are average, with the ammunition providing a small area to hit, making ammunition detonations rare. As with most vessels, its gun turrets are rather weak, with the bow 30 mm being sometimes knocked out after a simple frontal engagement with an enemy (though this is far more unlikely), and the larger 20 mm turrets being frequent impact points of enemy fire. The gun shields covering the 20 mm cannons may deflect or absorb a stray low calibre bullet, but do not rely on them to protect the turrets.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
The S-100 across all variants is a very mobile platform, and this variant is no exception. The craft has a top speed of 78 km/h, and a reverse speed of 23 km/h, when spaded. The S-100 can generate plenty of thrust as it has 3 decently sized propellers, each connected to a 2,000 hp Daimler-Benz MB-501 engine.<ref>[[wikipedia:E-boat|[Wikipedia] E-boat]]</ref> From this, it has great acceleration and deceleration, being able to accelerate and decelerate fast enough to evade enemy fire and prevent collisions. It has a quick rudder shifting speed, being able to rapidly change direction to evade obstacles and fire, and is slightly better than most other boats of the same displacement.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|MK103/38 (30 mm)}}

The primary armament consists of a single 30 mm MK103/38 mount in a swivelling turret, situated at the bow (front) of the vessel. This mount can be easily underestimated, as the previous boats of similar design in the tree have had a much weaker armament placed in this mount, and thus it can be easily overlooked. However, this is a mistake. Given the BR the S-100 (1944) is positioned in, heavily armoured targets are few and far between, and lightly armoured craft are in abundance. This is the premise at which the MK103/38 takes its prey. The MK103/38 does not have an excelling fire rate, being slightly under average than other armament at its level. It also has a below average reload, feeling slightly sluggish compared to other armament, such as the 20 mm MG C/38, which can be found on the same mounting on the previous boats in the tree. The ballistics of this weapon are nominal, with noticeably mundane trajectories which are easy to predict, a result of the higher calibre and thus better energy retention of the shells, however shots can be all over the place from the bad shot dispersion of the gun. As for the shells themselves, the HEIT shells featured in the clips of the 103s are deadly to even the larger spectrum of vessels to be encountered. These shells are prone to setting fires and inflicting thorough HE damage on a craft's hull and superstructure. The API rounds are also good for punching holes in an enemy vessel and blowing up inside. Given this, the best ammunition belt to equip the S-100 with would be the Universal belt, as it has a good balance between HEI and API; the HVAP rounds are not effective, as they over-penetrate without inflicting major damage. This weapon shows utmost efficacy in detonating ammunition stowage, so aiming for the front of enemy vessels, where it's placed on a lot of craft, is a viable strategy. All-in-all, a prestigious weapon.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|HEI-T|High-explosive incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEI-T|High-explosive incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}
* '''30 mm API magazines:''' {{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HVAP-T|High-velocity armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEI-T|High-explosive incendiary tracer}}
* '''30 mm HEIT magazines:''' {{Annotation|HEI-T|High-explosive incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEI-T|High-explosive incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEI-T|High-explosive incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-I|Armour-piercing incendiary}}

{{:MK103/38 (30 mm)/Ammunition|HEI-T naval, AP-I naval, HVAP-T}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 Flakvierling 38 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 Flakzwilling 38 (20 mm)}}

The secondary armament on the S-100 (1944) are two 20 mm autocannon turrets, one in the middle in a dual-mount and another closer to the stern in a quad-mount.

'''Surface engagements:'''
Surface targets can also be effectively engaged with the 20 mm guns. As the main armament only consists of a single cannon, many find it more desirable to utilize the secondary armament with a more primary armament role. The reason players choose this is because of the greatly increased fire rate and mass of fire from the 20 mm cannons over the 30 mm. This results in the 20 millimetres being much better suited to the tactic of "spray and pray" than more precise shooting, due to the abundance of fire they produce. They can be useful, even when mainly using the 30 mm, in situations such as when a group of lightly armoured enemies are presented, where a mass of fire is better suited to the job than the slow-firing 30 mm gun. They can also perform well in close-quarters situations, where the 30 mm may deplete its ammunition before an enemy is destroyed, and thus one can alternate between the former and the 20 mm cannons.

'''Anti-air engagements:'''
The S-100 (1944) has proficient armament in dealing with air targets. It carries a total of six 20 mm guns, which all have broad fields of fire, facilitating the engagement of enemy air targets. The 20 mm guns are best used for anti-aircraft purposes, as the 30 mm can be used to take out most surface targets. These guns have adequate velocity, and do well in getting shots on target, with abundant fire erupting from the vessel when an aircraft gets too close. However, these guns do not have good range, and usually project a high firing arc.

There are three ammunition types available:

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''20 mm HET magazines:''' {{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}
* '''20 mm APT magazines:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}

{{:2 cm/65 Flakzwilling 38 (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP, AP-T, HEF}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|MG 15 (7.92 mm)}}

The anti-air armament of the ship is made up of two 7.92 mm MG15 machine guns in two separate single-mounts on the bridge.

The MG15s can be of limited use as they do not pack the firepower, or the lack of fire restriction, which the twenty millimetres have. The MG15s are almost useless against surface targets, due to these limitations, compared to the 20 mm. If anything, they are simply there to supplement the available firepower on the boat.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)|WBD depth charge|EMF mine}}

The S-100 (1944) carries four 533 mm G7a torpedoes in two tubes situated on either side at the front of the craft, facing forward, with spares located directly behind. The torpedo tubes are pointed directly forwards, with no spread to any side. There's a slight dead zone to the direct front of the boat, which some craft can slip through, thus avoiding the torpedoes. The G7as, especially when the "Torpedo Mode" modification is installed, have substantially long range, and decent speed to boast. This allows them to strike enemies which are at a longer range to the battle, such as destroyers and cruisers, whom are sailing without change in direction or velocity.

The S-100 (1944) has access to 6 WBD depth charges. Having these in its possession allows for niche use in laying "extra temporary mines", that is, in that they're similar in use to mines. The S-100's high speed can be used to reach enemy choke points and lay depth charges in hopes that an enemy will approach unbeknownst to the charge and be damaged by its blast. However, this sees very limited practical use in combat. These depth charges are sure to become more useful in the future, however, as submarine gameplay is introduced.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The S-100 (1944) can be played as an aggressive assault ship focused on capturing points and targeting players. It is recommended to manually control the 20 mm cannons, as they can provide more firepower in a concentrated area than the 30 mm cannon. If defending a captured point, turn the ship in an angled broadside to allow the quad 20 mm cannon to fire while still allowing both the single 30 mm and the 20 mm cannons to fire.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* High mobility allows for rapid position changes and evasive action
* Proficient armament makes it effective against all, but particularly large and heavily armoured vessels
* Torpedoes are effective weapons owing to their sufficient range and speed, and ergonomic launching position on the craft
* Excellent anti-aircraft capability, derived from an abundance of 20 mm cannons on 360° mounts, and a pair of MG15s

'''Cons:'''

* Average yet adequate survivability
* Front MK103/38 has a small clip and relatively long reload time
* Craft may have to be turned farther than other nations' equivalents to launch torpedoes at multiple targets, due to lack of spread
* Mountings of the MG15s facilitate limited use as they're suited to niche scenarios

== History ==
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_s_100_s_174_class Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development
* [[S-100]]
* [[S-204 Lang]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

=== References ===
<references />

{{ShipManufacturer Lürssen}}
{{Germany boats}}