{{About
| about = German motor torpedo boat '''{{PAGENAME}}'''
| usage = the other version
| link = S-38b
}}
{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_s38
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->

The S-38 is a wooden-hulled vessel with a steel superstructure. The S-38 offers little resistance to damage as a result of its construction. The S-38 has a crew of 31, which means the S-38 can absorb reasonable amounts of damage when fired upon. Fire is a tangible threat on the S-38 because of its wooden hull. Due to the long construction of the ship, the crew is fairly spaced out. However, it is worth mentioning the S-38's bridge and radio station are in proximity, meaning if one is damaged, it is likely the other will be damaged soon after.

Ammunition storage is near the main guns. The ammo racks are fairly large targets and, due to the limited protection offered by the hull, can easily be hit. The ammo is also near the ship's fuel tanks and radio room, meaning if an enemy vessel is firing upon either, they could easily strike the ammo racks.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->

The S-38 is a quick boat, capable of achieving roughly 101 km/h (63 mph) forwards in arcade, and 33 km/h (21 mph) in reverse. The vessel's acceleration is good, and the S-38 has a tight turning radius. Due to the balanced distribution of the ship, it will not roll too far when turning. The boat has a shallow draft that makes fighting in shallow waters and littorals possible.

It is fair to say the ship is capable of getting itself into and out of combat quickly.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 C/30 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)}}

The S-38 carries two 20 mm automatic cannons. The S-38's weapons are, in proper hands, effective against enemy boats and aircraft. They have small magazines of 40 and 20 rounds respectively. The rearward cannon will run out of ammunition when the frontal cannon is halfway through its magazine. Overheating is not a concern with these cannons; they do not overheat. Being small cannons, the S-38's 20 mm traverse quickly, and offer decent angles of fire.

When upgraded, the S-38's 20 mm cannons are noteworthy. They should not be used beyond ranges of 800 m (0.5 mi).

There are three ammunition types available:

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''20 mm APT magazines:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''20 mm HET magazines:''' {{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}

{{:2 cm/65 C/30 (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP, HEF, AP-T}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)|WBD depth charge}}

The S-38 carries two G7a torpedoes, which are launched from tubes that are integrated into the front of the hull. The tubes are mounted at very shallow angles. The torpedoes are better used on slow targets, or at extreme ranges. These torpedoes have a slight blind spot in the front of the ship, but this blind spot is often negligible.

The G7a has a range of roughly 6 km (3.73 mi) and travel at a speed of 82 km/h (51 mph) when stock. The upgraded torpedo travels slower at 56 km/h (35 mph), yet travel up to 14 km (8.7 mi). The G7a is packed with the equivalent of 358.4 kg TNT (790.1 lb. TNT), and strike at the waterline, meaning the torpedo will deal fatal damage to most maritime targets.

The S-38 can carry 6 WBD depth charges, which carry 130 kg TNT (286 lb TNT) of explosive power. When used skilfully, these charges can be used to deal away with pursuers, or destroy inattentive enemies.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The S-38 is frequently used for rushing capture points. This is one use for the boat. The S-38 can be used to deliver surprise attacks, and deal away with targets behind enemy lines; the vessel is quick enough to speed past enemies and take "long ways" around enemy vessels. Using the S-38 in frontal, or even close, combat is not advisable. Though the main cannons traverse quickly and deal notable damage, the hull is too fragile to support sustained frontal engagements. It is also not advisable to engage more than one target at once. The S-38's cannons are not suited for fighting in numerical inferiority. Either chose lone targets, or operate in larger groups.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Very mobile
* Cannons offer effective stopping power for single target engagements
* Torpedoes are very viable in combat, as they are mounted conveniently and deal significant damage
* Inexpensive to operate
* Good crew size of 31

'''Cons:'''

* Hull offers minimal protection
* Key components are close together (ammo is near engines, radio room is near the bridge)
* Cannons have limited capacity per magazine
* Does not do well in numerical inferiority
* No anti-air cover beyond the main cannons

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
The S-38 was developed and built by the German Lürssen Werft in 1938/1939. In total, 8 units of the standard S-38 were built, followed by 16 units of the improved -B variant (see [[S-38b]]). Its main use was to protect German convoys in the Baltic Sea, as well as attacking Soviet ships. The S-38's plans were later used for the development of the ''Silbermöwe class'' in 1952.

'''The information below comes from the interrogation of the crew after their capture.'''

The S-38 was the lead ship of the S-38 class of Schnellboots (S-boots).

S-38 was laid down at Lürssen Yards, Vegesack, as one of the series of S-boots laid down in 1937-1938 (S-32 to S-45). S-38 was commissioned in mid-October, 1940. Her first assignment was to the 1st S-Flotilla, operating out of Kiel, as a replacement for S-19; S-19 had struck a mine in August and had to be towed to Calais.

On 9 November 1940, S-38 left Kiel for Borkum, travelling unaccompanied through the Kiel Canal. The ship spent the night in Borkum, and was then towed through the North Sea Canal from Delfzijl and Groningen to Zuyder Zee. She had to be towed through the canal because her minimum speed (even on only one engine) was 9 knots. S-38 arrived at Amsterdam and then proceeded through more canals to Rotterdam, arriving on 14 November 1940. No patrols were carried out until 19 November.

On 19 November 1940, S-38 and several other S-boots left Rotterdam at approximately 1700, and they separated at 2000. On this mission, S-38 was equipped with only 2 torpedoes in the tubes and two more at the ready. The crew described the mission as a patrol, with orders to sink any merchantman they found. S-38 reached the patrol area at 2130. The moon was shining brightly, but visibility was hindered by mist.

At 0158 BST on 20 November, HMS Campbell and HMS Garth (destroyers) sighted S-38 approximately 12 miles east of Southwold.

The crew of the S-38 first spotted one of the British destroyers to the starboard side. It seemed far away through the mist, but it soon became clear that it was steaming right towards them and was only 400 m away. S-38 sent out a message to another S-boot, warning them of the British ships.

S-38's commanding officer ordered the ship to turn starboard in order to fire the starboard torpedo tube. For some reason, the torpedo was unable to be fired immediately, so the ship was turned to port, as was the tactic after an attempted torpedo attack. During that turn, a torpedo was launched without aim, and it is unknown which torpedo tube fired. At that point, the Germans first saw the second British destroyers off the port side.

According to the German crew, the British had not spotted S-38 up until that point. Once they had spotted the S-boot, Campbell opened fire with close range weapons, hitting S-38's port side. The bow and the starboard torpedo tube were damaged, while the steering gear, lighting system, engine room telegraph and fuel tank were also hit. According to the crew, S-38 was hit by seven or eight shells.

In an attempt, the smoke generating system was turned on, but S-38 could only turn in a slight curve due to the damaged steering gear. The fuel tank caught fire, and one of the engines was knocked out. A few of the crew jumped overboard after the fire started.

With the intention of dropping depth charges into the path of the destroyers, a crewman ran aft, but was forced to abandon that plan after the British opened up with machine guns. The crew was forced to hit the deck and take cover behind whatever they could - mostly using the spare torpedoes - to avoid the machine gun fire. Campbell passed only 20 m in front of the bow of the ship, continuing to rake it with machine gun fire. Under such heavy fire, the crew of S-38 did not attempt to return fire.

Pinned down and caught in the beam of a British searchlight, the German commanding officer ordered the German war flag to be hauled down. The crew attempted to pull the wounded to the stern, as the ship was at that time sinking bow-first.

The S-38 sank at 0225; the crew claimed that the ship did not capsize, contradicting the British account of the action. Out of the crew of 23, 5 men were killed, with the other 18 being rescued by the British destroyers. Seven crew members and all three officers were wounded, while the other eight sailors were unharmed.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_s38 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[S-38b]]

== External links ==
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{ShipManufacturer Lürssen}}
{{Germany boats}}