{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_destroyer_class1939_t22
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German destroyer {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test. It is a big improvement from the first German destroyer [[Leopard]] in every major way.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
The T22 does not possess any armour except its 16 mm steel hull protecting it from small calibre machine gun fire. The main gun mounts are protected from the front, top, and sides by 8 mm thick anti-fragmentation armour shields protecting them from shrapnel. All the ship ammo magazines are located above waterline, making the ship vulnerable to magazine detonations. The machinery is protected by fuel tanks, which can absorb some fragments, but leave the ship vulnerable to fire. The crew complement consists of 206 sailors, which is more than any contemporary destroyer at its BR.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
The T22 is a quite manoeuvrable ship, having great rudder change authority while also being a fast destroyer at its BR, with a top speed of 61 km/h when fully upgraded.

{{NavalMobility
|SpeedForwardStockAB = 53
|SpeedBackStockAB = 23
|TurnTimeStockAB = 91.034
|TurnSpeedStockAB = 37
}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|SK C/32 (105 mm)}}

The 10.5 cm cannons perform effectively in spite of a slower calibre than German destroyers at the same BR. They offer a little more forgiveness to the player, while often offering less to the target. The damage dealt by the HE round with the base fuse, along with its reload, allows the player to whittle away at the target, and with a little aiming, can render the target completely defenceless.

{{:SK C/32 (105 mm)/Ammunition|10.5 cm Sprgr. L/4.4 Kpf.Z, 10.5 cm Sprgr. L/4.4 Bd.Z, 10.5 cm Sprgr. L/4.4 Zt.Z}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 Flakvierling 38 (20 mm)}}

Equipped with five single-mounted 2 cm/65 C/38 automatic cannons and a single 2 cm/65 Flakvierling 38 automatic cannons in a quadruple mount. The T22 boasts a formidable short range anti-aircraft and anti-shipping capabilities, being able to fire a rain of devastating bullets onto incoming enemies. The Flakvierling is located behind the second funnel on a platform above the deck while one of the single mounts is located at the beam of the ship, and the rest on the sides and on top of the bridge.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''20 mm HET magazines:''' {{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-T|High-explosive fragmentation tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}
* '''20 mm APT magazines:''' {{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP|Armour-piercing}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}

{{:2 cm/65 C/38 (20 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-T, AP, AP-T, HEF}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|SK C/30 (37 mm)}}

The anti-aircraft armament consists of a two dual-mounted 3.7 cm SK C/30 cannons with a very low fire rate of only 30 rounds per minute, which makes them very hard to use in their intended role of engaging enemy aircraft. These cannons are located directly behind the second funnel. Thanks to their high muzzle velocity and armour-piercing rounds, they can be used instead to engage coastal vessels at longer distances before they get to range of your 20 mm cannons.

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)|WBG depth charge}}

The T22 comes equipped with two triple torpedo launchers located amidship, with the first between the funnels and the second behind the second funnel at the stern of the ship. The torpedo used is the 533 mm G7a, which is used on most of German bluewater ships. With a base speed of 81 km/h, a range of 6 km and a payload of 358.4 kg TNTeq,  these are the third most powerful torpedoes in terms of explosive mass. When upgraded with a torpedo mode, the speed decreases to 56 km/h while boosting the range to 14 km.

The T22 can also be equipped with 14, or 2+6 x torpedoes WBG depth charges, with the projectors located directly on each side of the hull around the second funnel. These cannot be aimed precisely, so their usage is niche.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The T22 is a really capable destroyer with effective anti-ship capabilities due to its high calibre guns, and is best used supporting allied ships and destroying light vessels or lightly-armoured destroyers. The T22 has good manoeuvrability, but it suffers from unprotected ammo racks, leading often to detonation and instant death while utilizing a full broadside. Zigzagging while engaging is advised to evade at least some incoming damage. Its anti-air suite is very good for its BR, making enemy planes hard to get close enough for an attack. Torpedoes can either be launched with torpedo mode towards the enemy across the map right after battle start or without torpedo mode on a closing enemy vessel due to their fast speed, making them hard to evade at close distances.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Great reload speed
* Doesn't catch on fire very easily
* Its fast-firing weapons are easy to aim

'''Cons:'''

* Low ammo count
* Vulnerable magazines

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The T22, commissioned on February 28, 1942, belonged to the Type 39 torpedo boat class of the Kriegsmarine. Despite the classification as "destroyer" in War Thunder, the Type 1939 class were considered torpedo boats as opposed to destroyers at the time of the class' inception; the class was designed as an enlarged evolution of the prior Type 1937 torpedo boat class rather than a progression of a destroyer class. However, with a displacement and armament comparable to more typical destroyers, the Type 1939 class could reasonably be considered small destroyers rather than torpedo boats; some later German literature would come to refer to the Type 1939 torpedo boat class as the Schichau destroyer class. This classification as Schichau, alongside the Allied classification of the Type 1939 torpedo boat class as the Elbing class, was derived from the shipyard and city, respectively, at which all ships of the Type 1939 class were built.

Preceding classes of torpedo boats prior to the Type 1939 class were relatively small ships in the bluewater fleet context, at around 800 tons standard displacement and 85 metres long. Those torpedo boats were moderately fast and carried torpedoes as the primary armament, and gun firepower was negligible on these ships. In the intended role of escorting larger ships, an 800-ton torpedo boat would prove to be insufficient; the slim hull of a torpedo boat restricted the ability to install boilers and engines with enough power, and the lack of firepower and reliance on torpedoes reduced the ability of those torpedo boats to fight off a threat. To remedy this, the larger Type 1939 class was designed.

The class had an increased displacement of 1,200 tons standard displacement and increased hull size as well. The gun count was increased to four 105 mm guns in dual-purpose mounts, while the torpedo count remained the same as previous torpedo boat designs. Up to 60 mines could also be carried, although doing so made the ship dangerously top-heavy. In a distinction from destroyers of the time, the Type 1939 class had a large separation between its two engines and smokestacks, allowing a 105 mm gun and torpedo tube to be fitted in between them and increased the ability of damage control to be done in the case of engine damage. However, the boilers and turbines themselves were the same as prior torpedo boats, and therefore the speed of the Type 1939 class was subpar with a 31-knot top speed and 28-knot operational speed.

The operational history of the T22 was not particularly glamorous, and would end unfavourably for the ship. After a period of training through exercises in the Baltic Sea, the T22 was stationed in France. The first mission for the T22 was to escort the Italian cargo ship SS Cortellazzo on a blockade running mission from Bordeaux through the Bay of Biscay on November 29, 1942, accompanied by three other torpedo boats. Although that first mission proceeded without incident, the T22's second mission as an escort to Italian blockade runner Himalaya was called off after British aircraft assaulted the group. Later the T22 would accompany U-boats as part of the 4th Torpedo Boat Flotilla, which consisted of T22, T24, and T25.

T22's first significant battle was on the 22nd of October 1943 off the French coast near Sept-Îles. The 4th Torpedo Boat Flotilla as well as six minesweepers and two patrol boats were on a mission to ambush British naval forces under the guise of escorting German blockade runner Münsterland, which had no cargo and acted purely as bait. British intel on Münsterland that indicated the ship was transporting valuable goods and deployed the Dido-class light cruiser HMS Charybdis and six destroyers: H-class HMS Grenville, R-class HMS Rocket, and Hunt-classes HMS Limbourne, HMS Wensleydale, HMS Talybont and HMS Stevenstone. At midnight the British group performed a radar sweep that was detected by the German ships; similarly the British ships detected communications between the Germans upon noticing the British. The Münsterland was ordered to retreat to safety, and after the 4th Torpedo Boat Flotilla had visual contact with the British force the ships were ordered to fire all torpedoes and retreat; in total 24 torpedoes were launched from German ships. Due to poor weather conditions the British ships were unable to spot the German force, and only saw the trails of the German torpedoes after they were too close to evade. HMS Charybdis was hit by two torpedoes and sank. A torpedo launched from T22 hit HMS Limbourne and detonated her forward ammunition storage, completely blowing the bow of the ship off. HMS Limbourne was later scuttled due to the catastrophic damage. The remaining destroyers retreated, and the Battle of Sept-Îles would become the last naval victory the Kriegsmarine would hold over the Royal Navy.

The T22's second and last significant battle was the Battle of the Bay of Biscay, in late December 1943. German blockade runners Osorno and Alsterufer, transporting important Japanese goods, were escorted by a German force consisting of Type 1936A-class destroyers Z24, Z37, Z32, and Z27 of the 8th Destroyer Flotilla, the 4th Torpedo Boat Flotilla, and two unassociated torpedo boats. The British knew about the mission, having broken the German code, and deployed light cruisers Town-class HMS Glasgow and Emerald-class HMS Enterprise to intercept the German force. By that time blockade runner Alsterufer had been spotted and sunk by several RAF Consolidated B-24 Liberator bombers, and as a result the German escort force attempted to retreat back to friendly bays. At the same time, the two British light cruisers had reached a distance where they could fire on the fleeing German force, and opened up on the group at a range of 19.6 km, using their radars for rangefinding. The German force retaliated with their guns and torpedoes and split into two groups after deploying smoke. HMS Glasgow and HMS Enterprise also split up, with HMS Glasgow attacking the group with T22. Glasgow focused her fire on T25 and scored several hits on the torpedo boat, severely damaging T25. T22 approached T25 in an attempt to rescue the crew on the crippled ship and simultaneously attempted to engage both British light cruisers, launching a spread of all her torpedoes and opening fire with all her guns. No torpedoes hit, and T22 was forced to disengage from the rescue of T25 and instead deploy a smokescreen and break off from the group. Later T22 would meet up with Z23 and fall back to the bay of Saint-Jean-de-Luz.

T22 underwent a refit in Elbing from February 1944 to April, then was reassigned to the 6th Torpedo Boat Flotilla in the Baltic. T22's final mission was to lay a minefield in Narva Bay in August, which proved to be a disastrous incident for the flotilla. Upon beginning to lay mines the torpedo boats of the flotilla struck many mines; T30 hit two mines and broke in half and T32 hit one mine, blowing off her bow and disabling her engines. T22 attempted to approach T32 but herself struck a mine, exploding and sinking T22.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_destroyer_class1939_t22 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- 'Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;Related development

* [[T31]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [[wikipedia:Type_39_torpedo_boat|[Wikipedia] Type 39 torpedo boat]]

{{ShipManufacturer Schichau-Werke}}
{{Germany destroyers}}