{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_pr_131
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German motor torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update "Apex Predators"]].

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
Like every PT boat, it has barely any adequate armour and only 5 crew members, which makes it a fragile boat to play with. It also has engines that can somewhat be easily set on fire, a weakness shared with Soviet torpedo boats such as the [[Pr.123-bis]].

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
Its mobility is excellent, making it perfect for hit-and-run tactics. Combined with its relatively small size, it makes the boat an extremely hard-to-hit target, especially if the opposing ship is a destroyer or patrol ship.

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|ZU-23 (23 mm)}}

The main armament, a pair of 23 mm autocannons, can be used to great effect in ambush and hit-and-run situations, but at the cost of making it hard to aim in windy conditions and/or at high speed. The API-T belt can be used to destroy PT boats very quickly, though it may have trouble dealing damage to more armoured boats which are more common at its BR such as the [[MBK-161 early]]. It also has extremely small magazines, that combined with a fast rate of fire, can be depleted within 5 seconds of continuous fire, so it is best to fire in short bursts.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''HEI-T:''' {{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}
* '''API-T:''' {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer}}

{{:ZU-23 (23 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-I, API-T, HEFI-T}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|53-65 (533 mm)|UDM-E mine}}
The boat has space for two torpedoes and two mines. While the torpedoes are effective and can be used to bring down larger boats and destroyers with significant effect, the mines are situational at best so it isn't recommended to equip them.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->

The V-990 overall has a similar playstyle to the [[Pr.123K]]; though with a more powerful yet inaccurate armament and worse survivability. The gun is positioned in the rear, forcing you to expose your side, which consequently makes you an easier target. However it is compensated for by its extreme mobility for an MTB, which you can use to your advantage.

The V-990 performs best in point-capturing operations: you can use its speed to your advantage to capture points quickly. Thus, it is recommended to rush to the capture points immediately at the start of every battle. Once these points have been captured, you can move to ambush tactics, taking cover behind islands to take out boats that are approaching or using your speed to approach and torpedo unsuspecting destroyers and larger ships. However, use your speed carefully as even smaller boats are able to severely damage you. A single shot from a destroyer can easily send you back to the hangar.

Against other MTBs, the 23 mm guns are usually more than enough to shred them to pieces, but they have extremely poor stability, making it difficult to hit enemies especially in windy conditions: They are reserved for ambush tactics. If you react quickly enough with them, you might almost certainly win the engagement. It also has two potent torpedoes ideal for taking out destroyers and smaller ships (e.g. [[HMCS Brantford]]), or at least incapacitating them.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Very fast, reaches its top speed in only a few seconds
* Excellent turn rate
* Decent gun with fast traverse, short bursts are sometimes enough to destroy an enemy
* Fast and powerful torpedoes

'''Cons:'''

* Poor survivability, with only 5 crew members
* Inaccurate and unstable gun
* The cabin constitutes a huge forward blindspot for the rear gun
* Long reload time
* Very fast rate of fire will deplete the small magazines quickly

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
At the end of 1960, the development of a small torpedo carrier with increased operational criteria began. During development, the experience gained from previous projects proved to be very beneficial. This resulted in Project 131 Libelle, a 30 t boat with two torpedo tubes, two mine ejectors and a twin 23 mm anti-aircraft gun. There was the possibility of dismantling the mine ejectors and turning the ship into a transport variant that could transport up to 10 people (e.g. combat swimmers).

After the construction of four prototypes at the Peene shipyard in Wolgast, mass production of these boats began. By May 1977, 30 boats had been built. There were attempts to export the project to other nations, such as the Soviet Union, Poland, Bulgaria or Cuba, but this never materialized.

From 1984 to 1989, these ships were decommissioned. After the reunification of Germany, the German Navy demilitarized the remaining boats and handed them over to several navy and military museums throughout Germany.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_pr_131 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

;Videos

{{Youtube-gallery|9fuuBBRM3nM|'''This is How You Play - Pr.131.400 Libelle-Klasse V-990 - Naval Gameplay/Guide''' - ''Cmdr. Tyrael''}}

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->
* [http://s-boot.net/englisch/sboats-vm-libelle.html <nowiki>[Die Schnellboot-Seite] Small Torpedo-S-Boat (Klein-Torpedoschnellboot) "Libelle" (Projekt 131)</nowiki>]

{{ShipManufacturer Schiffswerft Rechlin}}
{{Germany boats}}