{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_vs10_hydrofoil
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a rank {{Specs|rank}} German hydrofoil torpedo boat {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update 1.79 "Project X"]] as part of the fleet closed beta test.

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
The survivability of the VS-10 is poor. With a crew of only 19 and almost no armour, the boat is very vulnerable against fast-firing autocannons that are common at this BR, especially on the sides. Due to its spaced profile, however, the VS-10 can take some damage and even a large calibre hit from a destroyer. Always make sure to make your bow (front) face enemy ships and try not to expose your vulnerable sides as much as possible.

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->

{{NavalMobility
|SpeedForwardStockAB = 95
|SpeedBackStockAB = 19
|SpeedForwardStockRB = 95
|SpeedBackStockRB = 19
}}

The VS-10 has good mobility and acceleration, mainly due to its hydrofoil hull design, which maximizes its forward speed. The boat can reach a top speed of 155/111 km/h (AB/RB) when fully upgraded. However, the use of hydrofoils can make manoeuvring difficult as the ship tends to drift sideways at high speeds and deceleration is weak. The VS-10's reverse speed is mediocre, also due to the hydrofoils, the ship is very slow to move around in reverse, making retreating difficult.

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|MG 151 (15 mm)}}

The main armament of the VS-10 consisted of six 15 mm MG 151 turrets, three at the bow, one on the bridge's roof, and the remaining two at the stern. If you're familiar with the [[LS 3]], it shouldn't take long to get used to the VS-10's armaments. Thanks to its rapid rate of fire of 750 rounds per minute and dense cone of fire, it is very deadly against any lightly-armoured boats it may come across. Being placed on a larger and taller platform, the MG 151 on the VS-10 has several improvements over the LS 3's such as improved effective range (up to 2.5 km), slower overheat time, larger ammo capacity, and faster reload time. The only drawback of the MG 151 on the VS-10 is that it's quite ineffective against armoured targets (especially Soviet armoured boats that are quite common at its BR), thus forcing the VS-10 to mainly rely on its torpedoes and artillery support to kill them.

There are three ammunition belts available:

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}
* '''15 mm HEIT belts:''' {{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEFI-T*|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary tracer (self-destroying)}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}
* '''15 mm APIT belts:''' {{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|API-T|Armour-piercing incendiary tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF|High-explosive fragmentation}}

{{:MG 151 (15 mm)/Ammunition|HEF naval, API-T naval, HEFI-T* naval}}

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)}}

The VS-10 is equipped with two 533 mm G7a torpedoes. These torpedoes are quick, reaching speeds of 81 km/h without the torpedo modification, and with it, 76 km/h. Given the VS-10's role as a fast attack craft, it is not suggested to install the torpedo modification, as this craft should be used in the close combat role, as mentioned in the "Usage in Battles" section. Uninstalling the torpedo modification allows for faster target impact, reducing the chance of your prey dodging the torpedoes, and requiring lesser lead, which is useful given their location on the vessel. The two G7a torpedoes are fired from single tubes on either side of the craft. These tubes have a moderate outward spread, unlike the preceding boats in its tree, making firing both at the same target or within proximity of each other difficult, which is exacerbated by the craft's poor high-speed manoeuvrability.

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
The main advantage of the VS-10 is its speed. It can be played in many ways, however, advancing to the middle of the map and holding down a position is advised. The armament can make short work of lesser-armoured vehicles, however, ships with many crews can pose a challenge. Many ships with guns over 70 mm can destroy the VS-10 in one shot. If faced with a difficult situation, it is advised that you retreat using the VS-10's superior speed. Important threats to this vehicle include the [[SF40 Light]] and other ships with large amounts of Anti-Air and secondary weapons.

When facing the VS-10, aim for the guns on the front deck and the torpedo launchers. Alternatively, aiming for centre mass is possible, however, the VS-10 will likely to be able to defend itself.

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Placement of the six gun turrets result in a very dense cone of fire against close-range ships and aircraft
* Lots of ammo, with limited need to reload, ensures a continuous stream of fire
* Quickly depletes the crews of unarmoured targets
* Very fast top speed for a boat (AB: 155 km/h / RB: 111 km/h)
* Stable firing platform at high-speed thanks to the hydrofoils
* Equipped with deadly G7a torpedoes

'''Cons:'''

* Hard to steer, and slower to decelerate when at high speed
* Placement of gun turrets makes it hard to get all guns on target when engaging other ships
* Guns are inaccurate and slow to reload if jammed
* Poor survivability due to low crew count and lack of armour
* Lacks harder-hitting weaponry against larger, armoured vessels, outside the available torpedoes
* Fixed torpedo launchers with very widespread are impractical in narrow waterways
* Hydrofoils make manoeuvring in shallow waters difficult

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->

The VS-10 was an experimental hydrofoil torpedo boat that was constructed in Gebr. Sachsenberg, Hamburg. Ordered in 1942, this ship was constructed of a mixture of materials to include wood, steel, and other alloy metals. The VS-10 was able to achieve a maximum speed of 50 knots, due to its 6,000 hp engine. The VS-10 was later destroyed in 1944 during an allied bombing raid. A similar 'sister' ship to the {{PAGENAME}} was ordered, but due to the lateness of the war and lack of needed materials was never constructed.

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins

* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_vs10_hydrofoil Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''

* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.''

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->

* [http://www.navypedia.org/ships/germany/ger_mb_vs10.htm <nowiki>[Navypedia]</nowiki> VS10 motor torpedo boat (hydrofoil)]

{{ShipManufacturer Sachsenberg-Werke}}
{{Germany boats}}