{{Specs-Card
|code=germ_destroyer_class1936c_z47
|images={{Specs-Card-Image|GarageImage_{{PAGENAME}}.jpg}}
}}

== Description ==
<!-- ''In the first part of the description, cover the history of the ship's creation and military application. In the second part, tell the reader about using this ship in the game. Add a screenshot: if a beginner player has a hard time remembering vehicles by name, a picture will help them identify the ship in question.'' -->
The '''{{Specs|name}}''' is a premium rank {{Specs|rank}} German destroyer {{Battle-rating}}. It was introduced in [[Update "Apex Predators"]].

== General info ==
=== Survivability and armour ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Armour}}
<!-- ''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.'' -->
''Talk about the vehicle's armour. Note the most well-defended and most vulnerable zones, e.g. the ammo magazine. Evaluate the composition of components and assemblies responsible for movement and manoeuvrability. Evaluate the survivability of the primary and secondary armaments separately. Don't forget to mention the size of the crew, which plays an important role in fleet mechanics. Save tips on preserving survivability for the "Usage in battles" section. If necessary, use a graphical template to show the most well-protected or most vulnerable points in the armour.''

=== Mobility ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Mobility}}
<!-- ''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.'' -->
''Write about the ship's mobility. Evaluate its power and manoeuvrability, rudder rerouting speed, stopping speed at full tilt, with its maximum forward and reverse speed.''

{{NavalMobility}}

=== Modifications and economy ===
{{Specs-Economy}}

== Armament ==
{{Specs-Fleet-Armaments}}
=== Primary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Primary}}
<!-- ''Provide information about the characteristics of the primary armament. Evaluate their efficacy in battle based on their reload speed, ballistics and the capacity of their shells. Add a link to the main article about the weapon: <code><nowiki>{{main|Weapon name (calibre)}}</nowiki></code>. Broadly describe the ammunition available for the primary armament, and provide recommendations on how to use it and which ammunition to choose.'' -->
{{main|SK C/41 (128 mm)}}

The Z47 has 6 x 12.8 cm SK C/41 guns mounted on twin turrets, one fore and two aft of the superstructure. Four of the six guns are located aft, so to bring all guns to bear the Z47 has to present a broadside.

Derived from the land based 12.8 cm FlaK 40, the SK C/41 has identical performance to the 12.7 cm SK C/34 guns present on most German destroyers. Any player familiar with the ballistics of the SK C/34 will feel at home with the Z47's main armament.

The Z47 has one of the fastest firing rates of destroyer guns in the game, with a whopping 20 rounds per minute with first stage ammunition, and 18 rounds per minute after the first stage ammunition has been depleted. The first-stage ammunition holds about 20 rounds per gun. Z47's main battery can tear apart destroyers and even overwhelm cruisers with the volume of fire it can put out.

The turrets have a traverse and elevation speed of 8.5 degrees per second, which is very sluggish. Both forward and rear turrets have a 150 degree traverse radius, with a relatively high elevation at +50 degrees and -10 degrees of gun depression. The Z47's dual-purpose turrets, unique among German destroyers can be utilized more effectively as anti-aircraft batteries, though its sluggish traverse may prove to be frustrating.

You can carry up to 720 shells. Z47 doesn't have a lot of ammunition choices, with the only available shells being normal HE and time fuzed HE. The HE shell is your go to for every match. It has decent explosive filler and muzzle velocity of 830 m/s. The time fuze shell is identical in every way except that it has a time fuze, which makes it somewhat useful against aircraft; while it may lack the accuracy of the proximity fuze shells of American and British destroyers, it is made up for by the gun's reload time and high elevation.

{{:SK C/41 (128 mm)/Ammunition|12.8 cm Spgr. L/4.5 Kz (mHb), 12.8 cm Spgr. L/4.5 Zt.Z (mHb)}}

=== Secondary armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Secondary}}
<!-- ''Some ships are fitted with weapons of various calibres. Secondary armaments are defined as weapons chosen with the control <code>Select secondary weapon</code>. Evaluate the secondary armaments and give advice on how to use them. Describe the ammunition available for the secondary armament. Provide recommendations on how to use them and which ammunition to choose. Remember that any anti-air armament, even heavy calibre weapons, belong in the next section. If there is no secondary armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)}}

The secondary armament consists of 7 twin-mounted 3.7 cm Flak autocannons. This is one of the heaviest secondary armaments of any destroyer in the game.

The 3.7 cm Flak has excellent muzzle velocity, giving it a large effective range. With similar range and velocity as the 12.8 cm guns, they can be used to great effect against surface targets such as PT boats and frigates. It can also considerably damage destroyers, peppering the superstructure and disabling enemy turrets due to its high rate of fire.

They are also excellent AA guns, with a large explosive mass. Any shell that hits a plane will turn it to flying wreck.

The Universal belt is the best belt for the 3.7 cm Flak, with a balance between HE and AP shells, perfect for surface and air targets.

* '''Universal:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}
* '''37 mm HE clips:''' {{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}
* '''37 mm APT clips:''' {{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|AP-T|Armour-piercing tracer}}{{-}}{{Annotation|HEF-I|High-explosive fragmentation incendiary}}

{{:FlaK-Lafette C/36 (37 mm)/Ammunition|HEF-I, AP-T}}

=== Anti-aircraft armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-AA}}
<!-- ''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|2 cm/65 Flakvierling 38 (20 mm)|2 cm/65 Flakzwilling 38 (20 mm)}}

''An important part of the ship's armament responsible for air defence. Anti-aircraft armament is defined by the weapon chosen with the control <code>Select anti-aircraft weapons</code>. Talk about the ship's anti-air cannons and machine guns, the number of guns and their positions, their effective range, and about their overall effectiveness – including against surface targets. If there are no anti-aircraft armaments, remove this section.''

=== Additional armament ===
{{Specs-Fleet-Additional}}
<!-- ''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.'' -->
{{main|G7a (533 mm)}}

''Describe the available additional armaments of the ship: depth charges, mines, torpedoes. Talk about their positions, available ammunition and launch features such as dead zones of torpedoes. If there is no additional armament, remove this section.''

== Usage in battles ==
<!-- ''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).'' -->
''Describe the technique of using this ship, the characteristics of her use in a team and tips on strategy. Abstain from writing an entire guide – don't try to provide a single point of view, but give the reader food for thought. Talk about the most dangerous opponents for this vehicle and provide recommendations on fighting them. If necessary, note the specifics of playing with this vehicle in various modes (AB, RB, SB).''

=== Pros and cons ===
<!-- ''Summarise and briefly evaluate the vehicle in terms of its characteristics and combat effectiveness. Mark its pros and cons in the bulleted list. Try not to use more than 6 points for each of the characteristics. Avoid using categorical definitions such as "bad", "good" and the like - use substitutions with softer forms such as "inadequate" and "effective".'' -->

'''Pros:'''

* Very fast rate of fire with the main guns
* 50 degrees of gun elevation allows the main guns to fire against enemy aircraft
* Extremely heavy AA armament for a ship of its size
* Comes with armour covering most of the ship and the ammo elevators
* Relatively large crew of 320 allows it to survive longer in a firefight
* Carries 12 torpedoes, more than any German destroyer
* Large secondary armament effective against surface and air targets

'''Cons:'''

* Sluggish turret traverse for the main battery
* Two of the three turrets are located aft, needs to reveal broadside to fire all guns
* Vulnerable to cruisers
* Thin armour provides little protection against SAP and AP shells
* No proximity fuze for the 12.8 cm HE shells limiting effectiveness against aircraft
* Lack of any armour piercing ammunition makes it hard to kill heavily armoured ships
* Slower than contemporary destroyers

== History ==
<!-- ''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).'' -->
''Describe the history of the creation and combat usage of the ship in more detail than in the introduction. If the historical reference turns out to be too long, take it to a separate article, taking a link to the article about the ship and adding a block "/History" (example: <nowiki>https://wiki.warthunder.com/(Ship-name)/History</nowiki>) and add a link to it here using the <code>main</code> template. Be sure to reference text and sources by using <code><nowiki><ref></ref></nowiki></code>, as well as adding them at the end of the article with <code><nowiki><references /></nowiki></code>. This section may also include the ship's dev blog entry (if applicable) and the in-game encyclopedia description (under <code><nowiki>=== In-game description ===</nowiki></code>, also if applicable).''

== Media ==
<!-- ''Excellent additions to the article would be video guides, screenshots from the game, and photos.'' -->

;Skins
* [https://live.warthunder.com/feed/camouflages/?vehicle=germ_destroyer_class1936c_z47 Skins and camouflages for the {{PAGENAME}} from live.warthunder.com.]

== See also ==
<!-- ''Links to articles on the War Thunder Wiki that you think will be useful for the reader, for example:''
* ''reference to the series of the ship;''
* ''links to approximate analogues of other nations and research trees.'' -->

;[[Type 1936 (Family)|Related development]]
* [[Z46]]

== External links ==
<!-- ''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''
* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.'' -->
''Paste links to sources and external resources, such as:''

* ''topic on the official game forum;''
* ''other literature.''

{{ShipManufacturer DeSchiMAG}}
{{Germany destroyers}}
{{Germany premium ships}}